North Yorkshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
Board1
Inspection date: 30 April 2014  21 May 2014
Report published: 30 June 2014
The overall judgement is good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.

Good


Good


Good


Good


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good.
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in
place to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because

North Yorkshire Council has taken very positive action to improve the quality of
its childrens services. Over the past year a newly appointed but experienced
Director of Childrens Services and his leadership team, underpinned by a
robust leadership pledge, have changed the culture in North Yorkshire. This has
led to significant improvements in partnership working, the quality of services
and the outcomes achieved by children and young people.


During this inspection services have been judged to be good. The authority has
an ambition for its services to be outstanding to ensure local children and
young people have the very best start in life. There are clear plans for this to
be achieved. Very good longer term financial planning has been established to
ensure the sustainability of the services for children, young people and their
families over the next five years.


Performance across a broad range of indicators is generally good or better than
statistical neighbours and this good performance is sustained or improving
against almost all indicators. Quality assurance arrangements have focused on
measuring whether a process occurs and the timeliness of performance rather
than the impact and experiences of children and young people. The authority is
aware that this requires further development.


Early help services are good. Children who are the subject of concern about
their welfare or who are at risk of harm are identified, supported and protected
well. The Signs Of Safety (SOS) methodology is now used across the county
effectively to assess and manage risk. Children only become looked after if they
need to be and families receive good support to address the issues which may
put children at risk of becoming looked after.


Children at most risk experience timely and effective multi-agency help.
Strategy meetings are a real strength in North Yorkshire with excellent
engagement by the police and other agencies. Child protection conferences are
chaired effectively. Commitment to providing a service to older young people in
need is particularly evident.


Inspectors saw much good work carried out by social workers to help children
and their families. In a small number of cases the performance monitoring
systems had not alerted senior managers to practice issues seen by inspectors,
where decisions were being made about stepping up or stepping down local
authority support. Most of these decisions related to complex family situations
where domestic abuse was a major factor. No children were seen to be at risk
in these cases as multi-agency services continued to support children, although


this meant that a very small number of children did not receive services to meet
their needs in a timely way.

Planning to provide children with a permanent home begins as soon as they
become looked after and, where needs are not complex, this is achieved with
minimal delay. Children enjoy positive and stable relationships with their social
workers who in the main visit regularly, help them to feel valued and undertake
purposeful direct work.


Council members show an improved and good understanding of their corporate
parenting responsibilities including for children placed out of area. One
excellent recent example of their work was the visit by two members, including
the Lead Member, to Wetherby Youth Offenders Institution to see a care leaver
placed there following a sentence for a serious offence.


Despite the good support looked after children receive, some of the childrens
chances of achieving good examination results are significantly below those of
other children. Health support for children looked after, including care leavers,
needs further development to ensure health passports are available and GP and
dental checks are made. Surveys of childrens emotional and mental health
could be used more purposefully to support looked after children in their
placements.

preparation, training and support for adopters. There has been an increase in
the number of adopters from 38 in 2013 to 50 in 2014. An ambitious target has
been set by the local authority of 70 for 201415. In 2013, 21 children were
adopted with 35 children being adopted in 2014, which is an improving trend.
advisors. Plans do not, however, always contain full detail to reflect the support
provided. Both academic and wider success is well celebrated and young people
feel justifiably proud of their achievements. Good educational provision is in
place for care leavers, the majority of whom are attending local further
education colleges, other education and training or university. There are 23
care leavers currently being well supported at university.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for improvement
evaluated as part of the local authority quality assurance framework.
local authority support, in particular where there is a complex family history
including domestic violence.
pathway plans. This should include a clear identification of the areas in need of
change to enable a better evaluation of the outcomes of the work undertaken.
immunisations, developmental checks and regular dental checks and that all
care leavers have access to their health histories.
all looked after children; in particular ensure strength and difficulty
questionnaires are used purposefully to assist individual planning.
stage of their education, particularly in Key Stage 4.
who would benefit from this.
or belief, gender, gender identity, language race and sexual orientation are
addressed in all assessments and care plans.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children Board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick HMI
Team inspectors: Sarah Urding HMI, Carolyn Spray HMI, Nicholas McMullen HMI,
Pam Blackman HMI, Fiona Parker HMI, Gary Lamb HMI, Ali Mekki HMI, Chris Williams
HMI and Dominic Porter-Moore.


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 120,136 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in North Yorkshire. This is 22% of the total population in the area. Around
District.
 Approximately 12% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7.4% of
all children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area
are White Other (2.2%) and Mixed (1.8%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 14%).
 North Yorkshire is the largest geographic county in England, split into seven
districts. Children live in communities which range from isolated rural
settlements and farms to market towns, seaside resorts and larger urban
conurbations. The county is also home to a significant military presence,
including the British Armys largest garrison at Catterick in the north of the
county, and around 3,000 children have at least one parent or carer serving in
the armed forces.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 3,421 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service3. This is a decrease
from 3,679 at 31 March 2013.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.
Based on number of open CiN cases and number of children subject to a Child Protection Plan


 At 31 March 2014, 377 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a decrease from 427 at 31 March 2013.
 At 31 March 2014, 18 children lived in a privately arranged foster placement.
This is a decrease of one in comparison with 31 March 2013.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2014, 465 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 39 per 10,000 children). This is a decrease from 489 (41 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
whom 26.5% live out of the authority area
authority area
area
 In the last 12 months:
 There have been 30 adoptions
returned to be looked after
on to independent living.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes, all of which were judged to
be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of North Yorkshires safeguarding arrangements was
in October 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of North Yorkshires adoption service was in May
 The previous inspection of North Yorkshires fostering service was in March


 The previous inspection of North Yorkshires private fostering service was in
November 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since August 2013.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good
help services. These are effectively coordinated through multi-agency screening
service meetings chaired by Early Intervention Managers. Multi-agency support
using the common assessment and team around the child activity is effective
and as a result the number of these family based meetings has increased to
over 1,400 meetings undertaken during 2013. This is providing good quality
assistance to those needing additional help. Parent Support Advisors provide
tailored interventions both at childrens centres and in the home. Practice is
soundly based on the Signs of Safety model. Professionals providing early
support know the children well. However, the high quality of the work is not
always reflected in the recording of plans, which sometimes lack detail of how
the success will be measured.
highly effective for children of all ages. The widespread use of the Vulnerability
Check List means all agencies have a thorough understanding of thresholds
when accessing early help or more specialist services. Step up and step down
arrangements from childrens services generally work well. The outcomes
meetings chaired by social care team managers are effective forums to identify
timely additional support for children with increasing complex needs. This is
particularly the case where early intervention services have not resulted in
sufficient improvements in childrens circumstances.
supported and protected very well. Contacts are effectively and efficiently
screened by the local authority customer service contact centre. When referrals
progress to assessments, highly effective daily screening and allocation
meetings take place. These apply the Signs Of Safety (SOS) model to identify
risk and need in order to determine the required action. This provides clear
early direction for social workers to ensure responses are proportionate to
vulnerability and children and families are not subjected unnecessarily to child
protection processes.
of initial assessments are completed within 10 days and 92.7% of core
assessments within 35 days. However, the rate of the referrals which result in
an assessment is low at 70.2%. Inspectors looked specifically at this issue and
identified that the decision making about whether to conduct an assessment in
a very small number of cases lacked sufficient rigour. No children were at risk
in the cases seen, but in this very small number of cases services were not
provided in a timely way. Assessments are in the main good and well recorded
and the application of the SOS model in the assessment process is enhancing
the engagement of parents and children and the quality of analyses.


Customer Service Contact Centre and this has improved the speed of service
response. There is sufficient capacity to respond to all children who need
protection out of office hours. The service can draw on additional support
provided by outreach workers to enable children to remain safely in their homes
until plans can be put in place by daytime workers. The service has a good
working relationship with police, who assist when the geographical size of the
county could hinder a speedy response. As a result, children's immediate
welfare is assured.
authority is supporting very well the army families living on or around the base.
These families can access a good range of early help services and appropriate
referrals are made if needs meet the threshold for childrens social care
services. Where there are higher levels of need, families are supported by good
information sharing and partnership working with the army welfare services.
effective multi-agency help. Face to face strategy meetings are a real strength
in this local authority. They are prioritised by all partner agencies, provide a
forum for very good quality information sharing and ensure a swift and
appropriate response to children in need of protection. Decision making in
section 47 investigations is robust and responsive to the emerging and known
risks in a case. Child protection conferences are chaired effectively by the
independent reviewing officers (IROs). They are child focused, ensure concerns
are shared and understood and establish plans that keep children safe. IROs
meet with children prior to meetings and provide effective challenge when
plans are not delivered in a timely way.
frequent contact with children and their families, and there is considerable
evidence of high quality direct work with children using SOS tools. Social
workers talk knowledgeably about the children that they are working with and
are sensitive to their needs, wishes and feelings. Children and young people are
listened to and services tailored accordingly. They are always visited and seen
alone. The voice of the child is evident in all of the case file records.
services and programmes, such as Making Safe and Project 6, which assist
families affected by substance misuse, domestic violence and poor mental
health. Multi-agency risk assessment conferences function appropriately across
the county and make decisions informed by good quality risk assessments to
provide coordinated support to those most at risk from domestic violence. Adult
mental health agencies are involved well in the formulating and delivery of
multi-agency child protection plans where necessary.
the Disabled Childrens Team. There is clear guidance in place regarding


thresholds for services for disabled children. An annual grant is available on
submission of proof of diagnosis and this reduces bureaucracy and supports
families promptly. There is also a variety of short breaks provision that can be
accessed through a county-wide resource panel.
quality, engaging children and families well. Due to the good engagement with
families many children are stepped down from child protection plans very
quickly to be supported by high quality multi-agency child in need plans. This
has resulted in the number of children subject to formal child protection plans
reducing and continuing to reduce. However, of the 377 children subject to
child protection plans at 31st March 2014, 22.5% were repeat child protection
plans. Inspectors scrutinised these cases and identified that most had been rereferred due to other concerns or there had been no issues about the care of
the children for a considerable period. In some cases, however, the step down
arrangements had been initiated before the sustainability of change had been
fully demonstrated. This was particularly when there was a history of domestic
abuse and complex family situations. As almost all of these cases children
became the subject of a child in need plan and this ensured that the safety of
these children was not compromised, though this resulted in a very small
number of children not receiving services to meet their needs in a timely way.
seen provide a good level of detail about the work undertaken and chronologies
are in place for most children. Management oversight and decision making is
clearly evidenced on the childs case file and on supervision records, which
provides effective assurance and direction on the quality of the work. The voice
of the child is a strong feature of the case recording. This is achieved by the
excellent engagement by the social workers with families, the good advocacy
services (particularly for older children) and the prioritisation given to the
recording of childrens views by the authority following deficiencies seen in the
last Ofsted inspection in 2012. However, assessments and plans do not
consistently take into account disability, ethnicity and personal identity needs,
although some good practice by workers was seen.
protection is particularly evident. Specialist Housing support services located in
support and only where their homelessness cannot be resolved will the young
person be referred to social care.
mistreatment or poor practice by professionals. Clear pathways effectively
ensure that childrens needs for immediate protection are prioritised. The
response is timely and cases are effectively managed. The Local Authority
Designated Officer makes an effective contribution to policy developments and


training to further raise awareness and contribute to best practice within
childrens services and other agencies.
identifying children and young people vulnerable to child sexual exploitation
(CSE) or missing from home, care and education. Children missing from home
and those at risk of CSE are identified, tracked and monitored. A combined risk
assessment tool that incorporates CSE is now in use which helps identify if this
is a feature in a missing episode. Strategic management meetings are held
where children have been assessed as high risk and this ensures that all
relevant intelligence is shared and acted upon.
reported missing from education are followed up swiftly by the Missing from
Education Co-ordinator. Where risk factors are identified, appropriate referrals
are made to other agencies, including the police. Details of all children missing
from education are registered on the main education database. The authority
has good links with the Army Welfare Service and this assists in resolving issues
when service families are posted elsewhere at short notice. As a result the
Missing from Education Welfare Co-ordinator is tracing a very small number of
children whose current whereabouts are unknown.
children who are privately fostered. Most notifications and initial visits are
timely with support available for children who are assessed as needing more
than regular statutory visiting. The local authority audits its private fostering
work annually and this has led to significant improvements in the quality of
services.
cases, opportunities for reflection and the progress of the social workers
professional development. Team meetings are used to disseminate and discuss
information, such as learning from Serious Case Reviews, as well as providing a
forum for group reflection. Sign of Safety team meetings also take place to
enable discussion of complex cases and this improves and enables good
practice.


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
individual needs and circumstances and, where necessary, provide intensive
support to prevent family breakdown and address the issues which are putting
children at risk of becoming looked after. For instance, the Family Intervention
Service (FIT) provides excellent support to families by applying a holistic Think
Family approach, utilising evidence-based models. FIT delivers the
Strengthening (Troubled) Families programme (which has received a very
positive evaluation from the Department of Education), the Mellow Parenting
programmes and Family Group Conferences.
are soundly based and timely, and include using legal interventions when in a
childs best interests. Public Law Outline processes are used effectively to
involve parents. Care proceedings are well managed so that planning for
childrens futures is not delayed. The local authoritys own data is showing a
very good performance, with the average time for completion being within 23
weeks, against the governments target of 26 weeks. Strong partnership
working with the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass)
and with the judiciary helps achieve this. Both report very positive working by
the local authority.
become looked after, with 61% of children achieving this in less than 20
months, which is very good in comparison to the national performance.
Children receive good support once a permanent home has been provided
whether this is adoption, with other carers or back home with their families.
Effective use is made of Special Guardianship Orders and financial support for
placements with connected persons. This means children are enabled to live
with carers from their extended family first when this best meets their needs.
may be able to return home. When this is the case, rehabilitation is based on a
robust assessment, decision making is sound and the return home is well
supported and monitored. As a result of the intensive efforts to support children
and young people there has been a reduction in the numbers of children looked
after from 489 to 465 over the past year.
good sufficiency strategy based on a robust analysis of current strengths and
gaps. This has informed targeted work in a range of areas, including
placements for older children, permanent foster care and in specific geographic
areas. Only 6.1% of children experience three or more moves of placement
compared to 11% nationally.


with carers committed to meeting their needs. This includes the local authoritys
six childrens homes, all of which have a track record of good or better
inspection judgements.
placed at a significant distance and only where childrens needs require more
specialist care. These placements are carefully chosen and monitored and
provide good quality care. This includes ensuring that childrens education and
health needs are met. Children are visited regularly and helped to keep contact
with their families. Two children in such placements, spoken to by inspectors,
felt well supported and were content with where they were living. However, in
both cases, providers reported that they had not been given all the written
information they needed in good time.
relationships with their social workers. They are visited regularly, helped to feel
valued and are well supported by purposeful direct work. Appropriate attention
and resource is committed to helping children maintain contact with their
family. Case recording is up to date and thorough and usually includes an upto-date assessment and care plan.
teenagers wait too long before a permanent foster placement for them is
found. The local authority has identified this as a shortfall and is taking action
to improve care planning and placement provision for these children. Life story
work is of a high quality when it is completed, but the authority has recognised
that some children are waiting too long to have this completed and inspectors
saw evidence of this during the inspection.
go to for support or advice. This includes access to an independent advocate or
independent visitor. Not all of the children and young people spoken to by
inspectors said they knew how to make a complaint but all felt supported and
that issues of concern to them are taken seriously. One child summed this up
as I would trust my social worker with my life.
meet their individual needs. Specific needs of looked after children arising from
their culture, ethnicity or language are identified in most cases and some
excellent examples were seen of these being addressed.
tracking if a looked after child goes missing. The patterns of risk taking
behaviour are analysed and effectively responded to and this is good practice.
Workers have a good awareness of the risks of CSE and consider this in their
risk assessments and planning.


training from the Fostering Service. They stated that they increasingly felt part
of the team around the child. They valued the Max Card which can be used for
a range of activities for the carers and placed children and young people. Their
experience of social workers varied from the very good to reports of
perfunctory engagement.
mental health support to looked after children and it is generally of a high
standard. It has a psychotherapist post which, although primarily used to
support treatment foster carers, provides practical advice and guidance to all
carers and fostering social workers. Carers and fostering social workers also
receive therapeutic intervention training with 120 foster carers trained to date
and 70% of fostering social workers. The service also has a dedicated out of
hours fostering duty rota in partnership with York City Council which can
provide advice and services if required. This contrasts well with the variable
quality of support and access to CAMHS provided previously, as seen on the
casefiles examined by inspectors. Strength and difficulty questionnaires are
regularly completed for looked after children but it is often not clear how these
have been used to improve childrens well-being.
will usually be well known to the child. Children are well supported to
participate in their reviews and IROs ensure that their voice is heard and they
challenge on their behalf. Children are now seen by their IRO before their first
review and between reviews if their situation is more complex. IRO caseloads
were higher than the national average, resulting in some cases not receiving
high quality support. The authority recognised this and work has been
undertaken to resolve this issue.
Education Looked After Children (ELAC) Virtual School service to achieve well at
school. The vast majority of looked after children in North Yorkshire attend
good or better schools. The majority of personal education plans (PEPs) seen
by inspectors are well prepared and fit for purpose. The PEPs contain clear, and
in some instances ambitious, educational targets both short-term and longterm. Plans effectively identify what help and support is needed to assist each
child to achieve and who will provide the assistance and by when.
fixed term exclusions are reducing. Where young people are in alternative
provision such as the Pupil Referral Units, this is well monitored by the ELAC
Virtual School to ensure that each young person receives at least 25 hours of
good quality education to suit their individual needs.
the progress of each child, looked after children do not do as well as their peers
in North Yorkshire and this gap is not closing for children at some stages of


their education. Attainment varies significantly between year groups as the
numbers in each cohort can be very small. The largest attainment gap in 2013
was in Key Stage 4 where attainment for this group achieving five A*-C GCSEs
including English and mathematics was very poor at 4% and significantly below
the national rate of 16%. However, inspectors scrutinised this in great detail
and a significant number of children in this cohort had identified learning needs
and many came into the care system at an older age. From the individual
childrens starting point, inspectors concluded that the ELAC Virtual School had
worked with schools and done as much as was possible to achieve. The
proportion of looked after children achieving five A*-C GCSEs not including
English and mathematics is much better and only slightly below national rates.
approach across a range of health providers. The vast majority of children and
young people are registered with a local GP and have good access to a
dedicated looked after children paediatrician who provides additional advice and
guidance. However, progress to ensure that all children have timely health and
dental checks, developmental checks and appropriate age related
immunisations is too variable. While some of this is attributable to inaccurate
recording, school nurses are currently not able to offer a service for young
people aged 1618 unless they are attending a state school or are in residential
care. This had been identified as a concern by the authority and they have
commissioned additional support to address this issue.
and those spoken to during this inspection reported an excellent range of
opportunities available to them which reflected their interests. There is also
targeted work to avoid looked after children becoming involved in offending.
Performance data now show a reduction in the proportion of looked after
children offending over the last four years and it is now below that of similar
authorities.
the services they receive and takes action to improve services in response.
There is a well-established and highly valued children in care council. Members
of three looked after childrens groups met by inspectors reported positively on
the support received from their workers and the local authority and on being
listened to.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is good
Adoption is considered at the earliest stage in case planning for children where
a return to their family would be unsafe or would not satisfactorily meet their
needs. This includes an appropriate use of concurrent and parallel planning.
Following the findings of a self-commissioned Adoption Diagnostic in April 2013,
North Yorkshire are now tracking from the point of referral children whose plan
is likely to become one of adoption. This enables managers to start considering


the availability of placements that can best meet childrens needs in a timely
way and this is ensuring effective early action. All social workers have also been
trained in permanency planning to enable them to understand and implement
any needed changes in practice to better support childrens long term future.
There are also effective links between the commissioning and contracts team
and operational services to ensure a timely identification of placement need at
an early stage.
adoptive family is 564 days which is very good and below statistical neighbours
and England averages at 643 and 647 days. This level of performance is
achievable because of the positive work undertaken with the courts and Cafcass
to improve the timeliness of care proceedings. According to the local authoritys
own data they are now within the government target of 26 weeks for the
completion of care proceedings and this is good. The average time between
North Yorkshire receiving court authority to place a child and the authority
deciding on a match to an adoptive family is 154 days, which is 56 days quicker
than the national performance. North Yorkshire is one of only 23 local
authorities to show improvements on their three year performance against both
these areas compared to 200811.
Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs) and Residence Orders (ROs) has been
achieved through effective senior manager oversight at the placement and
finding and matching panels. The quality and timeliness of decision making has
improved because there are clearly defined, well understood processes being
implemented to ensure detailed assessments of need are in place when first
required.
Yorkshire and Humber Adoption Consortium and BAAF, who organised an
activity day which involved children and prospective adopters. Managers and
staff are developing an innovative child and adopter led recruitment project to
target recruitment for older and harder to place children. The project
implementation has only recently been rolled out and therefore it is too early to
evaluate effectiveness. A further adoption activity day is planned with consortia
members for later in the year. Recently the Adoption Service was able to
identify 16 adoptive placements out of a group of 23 harder to place children.
North Yorkshire is effectively using streamlined approval processes for
adopters, including fast tracking for people adopting for second and subsequent
times. There is an improved focus on concurrent planning and fostering to
adopt following the outcome of the Adoption Diagnostic, although this is in the
early stages.
of adopters from 38 in 201213 to 50 in 201314. An ambitious target of 70
has been set for 201415. The grant has also been used to fund additional
social work posts, increase the capacity for family group conferences, and for


support workers in the Adoption Service and looked after children social work
posts. This has contributed to an increase in the number of children adopted
from 21 in 201213 to 35 children in 201314, which is a good performance.
an adoptive family, which is better than comparable authorities.
particularly complex backgrounds. This helps adopters to develop a richer
understanding of childrens histories and needs. Some children are waiting too
long for life story work, although when completed it is of a high quality.
agency decision maker (ADM). There is evidence of appropriate challenge by
panel and the ADM, with focused consideration given to permanence in relation
to the needs of individual children, including sibling groups. Assessments and
matching arrangements are of good quality and this contributes to timely
decision making for children. Disruptions to adoption placements are low and
analysis of these is being further improved by the recent appointment of
independent social workers to collate an overview of disruptions and lessons
learnt.
considerable financial pressures to reduce council expenditure 200 children are
looked after under SGOs until the age of 18 years as well as 18 children in
adoption placements.
of excellent support packages for individual children and adoptive families to
prevent placements breaking down. This includes work with birth parents to
support adoptive placements and the provision of specialist packages of respite
and support care for children with complex needs. Adopters are positive about
the quality of preparation, training and support. The Adoption Service facilitates
support groups, drop-in sessions and teenage support groups. Four adoption
Social Workers are trained in theraplay and use this in both direct work with
adopted children and in teaching parents how to strengthen their attachment
with their children. Birth Families can access support during the adoption
process and after adoption from the charity After Adoption Yorkshire. North
Yorkshire County Council provides a comprehensive post-adoption letter box
service managed by the Adoption Panels Advisor.
support within schools had been identified by the local authority as an area
needing further improvement and work is on-going to commission a new
service.
Fund pilot. The Adoption Service has already identified ten families for
additional support.


The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
personal advisors (PAs). One care leaver stated that my PA is fab and I would
keep her as a personal friend if I could. This reflected what inspectors heard in
talking to young people throughout the inspection.
young people from the of age 16 to 25. There are now a range of multi-agency
services working together, including targeted youth support, dedicated housing
workers, youth justice workers and accommodation providers such as
Barnardos and Foundation.
and young people met by inspectors were justifiably proud of their
achievements. A Young Peoples Council regularly meets to talk about issues
around being looked after and leaving care. They also meet with senior
managers to provide feedback about the experiences of children looked after.
An annual celebration event attended by the lead member and senior managers
from the authority celebrates the achievements of looked after children and
care leavers and this is valued highly by them.
needs, any potential risks and the level of support needed to help young people
become independent adults. PAs employ good strategies to engage and consult
young people. Good planning was evident in all of the cases seen by inspectors
and PAs talked knowledgeably about young people. However, care leavers
spoken to by inspectors said they did not always find the current pathway plan
to be a useful tool to effectively plan for their future. A bit tedious was how
one care leaver described completing their pathway plan. In written plans key
aspects are not always consistently completed.
and feel that North Yorkshire listens to their views very well. They have been
fully involved in developing the care leavers pledge and a recent redesign of
the pathway plan to ensure that in the future it will be more useful to them.
Care leavers have a good understanding of their rights and what they are
entitled to from the authority.
and dental checks and specialist health support through mental health services.
Sufficient specialist services are available in relation to sexual health and other
risk taking behaviour, for example the dangers of drugs and alcohol misuse
when this is required. The NSPCC also provides additional and well-targeted
help in relation to young peoples emotional well-being. Care leavers currently
do not have access to their health histories although work to address this has
begun.


attending local further education colleges, other education and training or
university. Currently the authority is supporting 23 young people in higher
education with a good package of independent advice and guidance, financial
support and on-going pastoral care. In addition new council internship, work
experience and a graduate apprenticeship schemes are being developed. The
proportion of young people who are not in education, employment or training is
North Yorkshire.
individual needs. Of those living in the local area 51% manage their own
tenancies supported by an effective 'pathways' project. The seven district
councils prioritise care leavers to gold status in their bid for social housing.
Therefore, the majority of care leavers who apply in North Yorkshire are
successful in being housed in their own tenancies. Of the current cohort of care
leavers 37% (80) choose to live outside the local authority area. In the main
they live a short distance from the local authority boundaries and in the main
are supported well by the authority. Temporary bed and breakfast
accommodation is not used by the authority and this is good.
security of remaining with their foster family post-18 and this is good. Since
leavers told inspectors that being able to stay with their foster carers made all
the difference to them in being able to access continuing education.
have a disability, to make sure they receive all their financial entitlements, for
example educational bursaries, adult learning grants, disability living allowance,
housing benefit and independent living grant. Better links with Job Centres are
improving care leavers access to their benefit entitlements.


Leadership, management and governance are good
the Chief Executive, Lead Member, Director of Childrens Services and the North
Yorkshire Safeguarding Children Board. Collective statutory responsibilities are
met and effective corporate and aligned strategic planning is securing a shared
vision and ambition for children, young people and their families.
will help ensure the sustainability of services. As part of this there is a
commitment to the protection of front line services and to the recruitment of
additional staff to further improve the delivery.
quality of service delivery since 2010, which culminated in the transformation of
services in March 2012. A change in culture has been led by the new Director of
Childrens Services and his leadership team, underpinned by a strong leadership
pledge. This has facilitated a new focus on partnership working, a commitment
to improving performance and the quality of services and the outcomes for
children and young people.
teams and areas, to further develop collaboration with services and agencies
and to manage budgets to deliver efficiencies. There is good progress in a
number of areas. For example, improved support for children on the edge of
care, safe reduction of the numbers of children looked after and consistency of
practice across North Yorkshire. Actions arising from inspections, including the
child protection inspection in 2012, have been addressed by appropriately
focused and monitored action planning.
Joint Strategic Needs Assessment is currently being refreshed to incorporate a
further range of information about children and young people and their
families. This includes integrating their already good understanding about the
prevalence of domestic abuse, substance misuse and mental health across the
county. The local authority is able to differentiate need and is providing a range
of appropriately targeted services at a local level because of this good range of
information.
for Looked After Children and this is being used effectively to plan future
service delivery. There are also improved and aligned commissioning and
procurement processes across childrens services. For instance with Health
partners the alignment between the healthy child programme and 019
preventative agenda in childrens service has commenced. The contract for
emotional mental health services is also being re-tendered to ensure service
provision meets the needs across the county.


joined up strategic planning. The Childrens Trust has been retained and
children and young people are a clear focus of the Health and Well-being
Board. There are coherent strategies in place within the local authority and
childrens social care that set out clearly the vision for services for children,
young people and families. This includes a clear strategic focus on enhancing
prevention and this has been communicated effectively to the social care
workforce. This aligns coherently with the Looked After Children strategy.
people was presented to the Health and Wellbeing Board recently. This is
raising the profile of childrens views in strategic decision making and
contributing to securing shared priorities amongst partners.
Family Justice Board. This has ensured that very good progress has been made
in reducing delay for children and young people in care proceedings.
has secured a stable and permanent workforce. The vacancy rate is low at 7%
and there is a low turnover of staff. There are no agency workers and 50% of
the workforce are experienced social workers. There is a long term investment,
both financially and professionally, in developing social workers practice and
career paths in line with the vision for childrens social care. This includes very
good support for newly qualified social workers and a range of programmes
such as step up to social work and grow your own as well as responsive and
targeted recruitment practice to ensure that the different locality needs are
met.
materials via web-based learning and resource sites. Learning is well promoted
in childrens services; for instance, Signs Of Safety and compulsory permanency
and reflective supervision training. All of these have contributed to significant
improvements in the services. The Signs Of Safety model is fully embedded in
the Assessment and Impact teams and is being further embedded across all
social work teams. This has led to an improved focus on children, young people
and families and raised the quality of social work assessments and of direct
work with families. The Permanency training has contributed to the
consideration of adoption at the earliest opportunity and has supported the
improvement in the numbers and timeliness of children being adopted. Other
examples include serious case review evaluations cascaded to social workers via
briefings. Research to inform assessments was seen by inspectors but this is
not fully embedded.
evaluation in relation to complaints and placement disruptions. For instance
placement disruptions are now being assessed by someone independent of the


service. An overview of this work is currently being evaluated to inform
learning. Information from complaints has been used to good effect to improve
the challenge provided by IROs and the timeliness of reports.
people and families to share their views, is a positive step to embedding
consistency in relation to learning from feedback. It is, however, too early in its
development to see significant impact. Children and young people meet
regularly with elected members through the Childrens Council and they are
making positive contributions to improving service delivery, for example in
relation to the location of health assessments.
to understand and address any dips in performance. A broad suite of indicators
is robustly and regularly monitored by the senior leadership team. A scorecard
is currently being developed to further embed understanding of the key areas
for improvement. Very good performance outcomes have been achieved and
sustained across most areas but this is not the case in all indicators; for
instance, attainment at education Key Stage 4 and in relation to health
outcomes for looked after children. Childrens service delivery plans and the
performance management framework do not sufficiently highlight the key areas
for improvement and it is not sufficiently clear how some of the performance
issues identified during the inspection were being tackled.
and in what timescale. Case file audits seen by inspectors were descriptive of
processes. Currently the experiences of children and young people are not
systematically evaluated as part of this framework.
Managers have successfully driven improvement in a number of areas such as
completion of case chronologies, ensuring child in need plans are consistently in
place and improving the quality of assessments. However, some of the issues
about front line practice, such as the lack of robust decision making prior to
stepping down cases, had not been identified, and the high percentage of
repeat child protection plans had not been fully scrutinised prior to being
evaluated by inspectors.
embedded in practice. Caseloads are manageable and range between 10 and
another has resulted in higher than average caseloads for a small number of
social workers. This was addressed during the inspection by the authority and
caseloads were reduced.
understanding of the looked after children population through regular and
detailed performance information briefings. There is purposeful engagement by


members with children, social workers, and foster carers. This includes an
awareness of children placed out of area. Members alongside officers are
looking at ways of improving participation of children, including those placed
out of area, through the roll out of ipads and the use of shared websites for
meetings. An example of excellent work was the visit by the Lead member and
a colleague to the local Wetherby Young Offenders Institution where a care
leaver had been placed as part of his sentence for a serious offence. The
looked after children members group offers appropriate challenge and has been
working on improving health assessment, the quality of personal education
plans, the use of the pupil premium and work with the police in relation to
looked after children with offending behaviours.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is good
Areas for improvement
domestic abuse has in the NYSCB business plan in line with the level of local
need.
education to engage in strategic planning and decision making across the area.
report. Formalise an agreed protocol for links and communication between key
strategic Boards, in particular the Health and Well-Being Board.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
partnership, with a strong independent Chair and business manager providing a
clear direction and effective challenge to ensure that the Board fulfils the
requirements of legislation.
Director of Childrens Services and Lead Member to ensure that they are fully
informed of the work of the Board and how this is influencing and improving
safeguarding practice. The Lead Member has also been proactive in taking
information to the scrutiny panel and providing challenge where necessary, for
example over E- Safety and information regarding missing children.
task groups and well-represented locality groups known as Childrens
Safeguarding and Strategy Groups. The Army Welfare Service is well
represented, ensuring good links with Catterick Garrison.
Safeguarding and Strategy Groups (CSSG) and the main board. Although
meeting the requirements in the guidance, the membership of the main
strategic Board would be strengthened further by securing representation from
education institutions.
childrens interests are a priority across the Boards. Although arrangements are
effective in practice they are not formalised through an agreed protocol. Links
with the Domestic Abuse Board could be strengthened in view of the


acknowledged prevalence within the county and within referrals to childrens
services.
commitments from partners. This enables the Board to deliver against the key
strategic priorities of an effective business plan that is informed by data,
training and learning from case reviews and file audits. This ensures that the
Board knows the area very well and has an excellent knowledge of front line
practice.
and all agencies understand and meet their core responsibilities for promoting
children and young peoples safety, welfare and outcomes. This is evident at a
strategic level, demonstrated by all professionals sharing responsibility for
driving key business priorities through chairing and prioritising their roles within
the NYSCB sub-groups. The agreed mechanisms for monitoring and
understanding the effectiveness of local arrangements underpin the confidence
of the Board and sub-groups in the quality of safeguarding.
generates well-disseminated information to share and promote improvements
of front line practice through learning from audits, national policy developments
and guidance. Serious case reviews are initiated and published in line with
guidance. There had been no serious incidents requiring notifications to be
made to Ofsted in the last twelve months up until April 2014 and there had
been no serious case reviews (SCR) undertaken in North Yorkshire. However
immediately following the inspection there was an appropriate notification of an
incident and currently consideration is underway of whether to hold a SCR.
Early Help Offer which is well embedded in practice and leads to children and
young people receiving consistent responses and interventions in the majority
of cases. Multi-agency audits review the application of thresholds at referral
point and step-up and step-down points, test consistency and report findings to
the Board for oversight.
strength of the NYSCB. The Board learns from the auditing and reviews that are
undertaken and that ultimately inform training. Conferences have been well
received and have been attended by practitioners from across the partner
agencies. The child sexual exploitation (CSE) conference is an example of the
Board providing a quality learning event that professionals can see has made a
direct difference to practice by raising awareness. This has included better
screening of CSE concerns and an increase in referrals.
identifying children and young people vulnerable to child sexual exploitation


(CSE) or missing from home, care and or education. The NYSCB monitors this
area of work well and uses aggregate data to track trends and shape services.
made to the accessibility of events across the county, including ensuring
training events are linked to the days allocated for training to the police. Overall
this has significantly increased agencies attendance at NYSCB events from 57%
to 83% currently. Training is well targeted to improve practice, informed by
practitioners learning needs based upon thematic and multi-agency practice
audits and learning from serious case reviews. National research findings and
new guidance are incorporated in addition to ensuring the needs of children
with disabilities are fully represented in all training programmes.
Section 11 audits resulting in clear action plans to address weaknesses across
services. Many examples, such as improving strategy meetings and pre-birth
interventions, have made a measurable difference to practice, procedural and
policy development and training. Policies and procedures are regularly improved
and updated.
consolidate the current and comprehensive safeguarding data received by the
Board into one coherent framework. The first consolidated data set is to be
provided to the Board in July 2014. This is to enhance the Boards current
overview of key priorities, such as taking action to reduce children missing.
and young people to develop the Board further. An example of this has been
the work young people have undertaken in reviewing the web-site to improve
its appeal to young people. This includes links to videos and E-safety material
to inform young people on their choices in risk-taking behaviours.
from required panels, sub-groups, task groups and childrens social care. The
report does not contain an evaluation of private fostering data although the
Board receives an annual report regarding private fostering.
child looked after. The LSCB is appropriately considering whether to hold a
serious case review. This is a traumatic event for all concerned. It is too early
to identify the precise details of the events and what, if any, learning needs to
be taken forward for the future.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


