North East Lincolnshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 10 July 2017 to 3 August 2017
Report published: 25 September 2017

Childrens services in North East Lincolnshire are good

Requires improvement to
be good

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in North East Lincolnshire are good. Progress has been made in
the local authority since the last full inspection of childrens services in 2012. Services
have been strengthened. Childrens needs are identified and met more quickly, and
they benefit from joint support delivered via child in need and child protection
arrangements. Partners share a commitment to strengthening preventative services
for children and families to provide early help and reduce the demand for statutory
social care services. This is beginning to have the desired impact.
The local authority has successfully attracted additional investment to support
development plans. Strategic partners have reconfigured their resources in
consultation with each other to maximise joint impact. The most deprived areas are
benefiting from multi-agency, targeted interventions that are intended to have longterm impact on outcomes for children and families.
The local authority knows itself well through good use of detailed and accurate
performance information and a robust quality assurance framework. Areas of
strength and weakness are identified and addressed. Many successes can be seen
through this approach, but some weaknesses persist, such as the timeliness of social
work assessments, the clarity of plans and the uptake of the councils preferred
neglect assessment tool. Private fostering is not promoted, and no privately fostered
children are assessed and supported at the time of the inspection.
The workforce strategy, which includes a comprehensive training offer, is successful.
Staff turnover has been reduced by over half in the last two years. Further work is
underway to improve workforce stability on a regional basis, and good efforts to
increase the qualifications and expertise of the workforce continue.
The local authority works well with its partners to safeguard children who go missing
and those at risk of child sexual exploitation or radicalisation. Appropriate
interventions for individual children occur, alongside coordinated and effective
strategic oversight and responses. The strong emphasis on prevention ensures that
many children are helped to stay safe and avoid risky situations. There is good,
widespread awareness raising of these issues across the community.
The very small number of children at high risk of sexual exploitation are known.
Considerable effort is made to understand and share information about their
circumstances. However, the records of meetings do not clearly set out if this is
achieving improved safety for them.
Thresholds for statutory childrens social care involvement are widely disseminated
and generally understood across partner agencies. Assessing the right level of
support for a child and their family is assisted by the joint enterprise of the multiagency Families First Access Point (FFAP), a single point of contact for requests for
support across the spectrum of early help and statutory services.


Childrens circumstances are appropriately considered and further information is
gathered to determine the most appropriate level of intervention. While this system
generally works well, some shortfalls were seen during the inspection, leading to
needs and risks remaining unassessed or addressed for a few families. The local
authority swiftly amended systems during the inspection, providing assurance that
this would not recur.
Statutory child in need and safeguarding services are effective. All agencies are fully
engaged in supporting and protecting children and families. A range of panels
provide additional assurance that decisions to escalate or de-escalate the level of
intervention in an individual childs and familys life are carefully considered and
agreed on a multi-agency basis.
There is an appropriate focus on understanding risk and protective factors for
children, although assessments are not always sufficiently analytical and too many
take too long to complete. Plans are not always sufficiently clear about individual
responsibilities, timescales or desired outcomes. This contributes to difficulties in
measuring progress and reducing delay for some children, whose outcomes are not
improving quickly enough.
Efforts have been made to ensure that practitioners in all agencies have the skills
and tools to identify and respond to neglect. However, the partnerships preferred
assessment tool remains under-used in all agencies that work with children.
Decisions that children should come into care are appropriate and timely. The local
authority is successful in nearly all its applications for care orders to the courts.
Children are enabled to return to the care of their parents when it is safe to do so,
with arrangements carefully monitored and supported. More children would benefit
from independent visitors and support from the effective advocacy service.
Outcomes for children in care are positive, and placement stability continues to
improve. Children are placed in stable and secure alternative homes as quickly as
possible. Adoption performance is good and improving, with many strong aspects.
However, child permanence reports are variable in quality.
Social workers visit regularly and know their children well. Independent reviewing
officers (IROs) provide good oversight and keep plans on track. Educational and
other progress is tracked, with additional support provided promptly. Current
progress across all education key stages is positive.
Care leavers have a good range of support services, including personal advisors
(PAs) and suitable housing options. They develop good independence skills.
However, too many care leavers, particularly those aged 19 to 21, are not currently
in education, employment or training (NEET). They are not routinely given details of
their health histories.
Childrens views are considered well in individual plans for them, but insufficient
attention has been given to enhancing their collective influence. The Council for
Children in Care (CfCC) is underdeveloped. The corporate parenting panel does not
hear enough directly from children or check that the pledge is being kept. The
scrutiny panel is insufficiently focused on children in care and care leavers.


The Health and Wellbeing Boards focus on vulnerable children is weak and the
childrens action plan is not up to date, hampering the ability to see its impact.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates eight childrens homes. All were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in May
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since September 2013
and became the deputy chief executive in 2015.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since June
Children living in this area
 Approximately 34,204 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in North East Lincolnshire. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 29% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 15% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 16%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Child protection in this area
 At 30 June 2017, 1,948 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from 2,029 at
 At 30 June 2017, 204 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 60 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 221
(65 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 30 June 2017, no children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from three at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, no serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review (SCR) has been completed.
 There were no SCRs ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 June 2017, 307 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 90 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 295 (86 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016. Of this number:
authority area
 Three live in residential special schools3, all of whom live out of the
authority area
 Six are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 18 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house
in multiple occupation.
The casework model used in this area
 Signs of Safety.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Social work assessments of children and their families should be timely, and
lead to clear plans and interventions which enable the extent of progress to be
measured.


Ensure that the intervention plans for children and young people at high risk of
sexual exploitation are clear and that their progress over time is tracked.


More care leavers should benefit from education, employment and training
opportunities, including those provided by the local authority as a diligent
corporate parent.


Ensure that the CfCC is able to influence senior decision-makers in the local
authority area effectively.


The corporate parenting panel should ensure that all council services are
executing their duties towards children in care, in line with the pledge.


The local political scrutiny panel should be aware of how well vulnerable
children are being supported.


Ensure that the Health and Wellbeing Boards priorities for children are aligned
with other strategic boards priorities, and that progress is being made with
these priorities.


Ensure that care leavers have full information about their health histories.


All child permanence reports should include a good, comprehensive account of
an adopted childs birth family history.

children in care who would benefit from these opportunities.
fostered can be assessed and provided with support appropriate to their needs.


Summary for children and young people
 Many people work together to help children and young people to achieve their
goals and stay safe. They include family support workers, social workers, health
workers, the police and youth workers.
 Children and young people are helped to stay safe. This includes being safe from
dangers such as sexual exploitation and radicalisation. Some adults were placing
children and young people at risk. The police have stopped them doing this.
 Some children and young people have been neglected by their parents, and the
council is working hard to stop this. We agree with the councils managers that
there is more to do. Everyone who works with children and young people needs
to be able to spot neglect.
 Social workers give good help to those children and young people who need it.
We have asked managers to make sure that childrens needs are assessed
quicker so that faster help is given.
 We have asked for childrens plans to be clearer, so that everybody knows exactly
what should happen next. Plans need to say who is responsible and when
something should happen by.
 Many young people share their views at meetings. Advocates are available to help
them. This is a good service, and we have asked the council to make sure that
every child and young person knows about it.
 Children who come into care have plenty of support and their lives improve. They
can stay in touch with people who are important to them. They have good foster
carers and generally achieve well. Everyone goes to the school that is best for
them, and everyone has extra support to achieve.
 The council has promised to look after children who are in care. The council is
their corporate parent. Many promises are being kept, but there are some areas
that need more support.
 The Council for Children in Care needs better support and help. This is so that
more children and young people can be involved. This will help councillors to
know what is important to young people and respond to them.
 Care leavers have plenty of help to smooth their path into independent living. If
they want, they can stay with their foster carers as they get older. Care leavers
need to have full details of their health histories.
 Too many care leavers are NEET. We have asked the council to help young
people to go to college. More young people should have apprenticeships and
jobs.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Children who need help and protection in North East Lincolnshire receive services
that keep them safe. Social workers know their children and families well, and
there is a strong focus on understanding their needs, based on a recognised model
of social work practice. However, analyses of needs do not always result in
effective plans that measure progress in a timely way to ensure that childrens
outcomes are improved and sustained.
Early help is well established, with a range of services to support families. Contacts
and referrals to childrens social care are coordinated effectively, although
arrangements are still developing and being refined  for example, reducing the
number of electronic inboxes for different services.
Multi-agency working is a strength. Children benefit from information sharing
between agencies to decide the appropriate next steps to safeguard them. The
quality of referral information from other agencies remains variable. The response
to children and families who are signposted to early help services has not always
been timely.
Too many single assessments take too long to be completed, and performance has
not improved despite management actions intended to tackle this. This means that
some children and families experience drift and delay while their needs are
identified, before a clear plan of support is put in place.
Efforts have been made to ensure that practitioners in all agencies have the skills
and tools to identify and respond to neglect. However, the use of the preferred
assessment tool is underdeveloped within childrens social care and in other
services. Some children have remained in neglectful situations for too long.
Childrens voices are routinely sought and reflected in their case records. The
multi-agency response to children who are missing and/or at risk of sexual
exploitation is prompt and determined, and captures childrens views well. Good
work takes place to prevent child sexual exploitation and to educate children about
risks. Considerable information sharing and multi-agency discussion take place for
children at high risk of sexual exploitation, leading to intervention plans. However,
some plans are too brief and do not show effectiveness in reducing the risks
experienced by these children.
Private fostering is not promoted or given sufficient priority across the childrens
workforce.
Children who have disabilities receive a good service and are well supported to
make the transition to adult social care at the right time.


Inspection findings
support to children and families through easily accessible centres, known as
family hubs, located across the community. Early help assessments are variable
in quality, but all are based on a recognised model of practice which has been
adopted across childrens services. The model helps workers, parents and
children to understand each familys strengths and weaknesses, and how these
are affecting their children. Early help assessments assimilate concerns and
decide on the next steps, ensuring that support is tailored to meet the diverse
individual needs of children and families.
progress appears to have been made, despite the provision of early help
services. This ensures that cases are escalated appropriately to childrens social
care for additional support.
appropriate support and interventions according to their needs, such as access
to accredited parenting programmes. Support from within families is identified
well through extensive use of family group conferences. Children benefit from a
suitable range of respite and outreach activities to prevent family breakdown
and avoid coming into care.
by the FFAP, operational since January 2017. The FFAP is multi-agency and has
appropriate management oversight at key decision-making points  for
example, when a contact should lead to a social work assessment. Co-location
of social workers, police officers and other specialists from early help and health
services ensures swift, coordinated responses. Prompt, good-quality information
sharing with wider health services, such as substance misuse and midwifery, is
facilitated by the specialist safeguarding nurse in the FFAP.
and some requests for support do not make it clear whether parental consent
has been secured prior to the request being made. Other weaknesses in the
FFAP arrangements were seen by inspectors. Some referrals were assigned to
an early help assessment inbox without the reasons for the referral being
reviewed by the social workers or managers in the FFAP. A small number of
cases were seen in which the presenting information indicated that a statutory
service was required. The local authority rectified these arrangements during
the inspection so that all contacts and referrals are considered before
determining the appropriate next steps for each family.
partner agencies, although a small number of childrens cases were seen in
which earlier referral was warranted and childrens needs were not met as a
result. When children are referred, the immediate risk of harm is identified
effectively within the FFAP. Children are kept safe and progressed through to


childrens social care teams promptly for a single assessment or other action.
The rationale for decisions on next steps is recorded clearly, and children are
seen by social workers promptly and on their own, when relevant. In a small
number of cases, families are signposted to early help services despite having
complex needs and risk factors. This has delayed the delivery of statutory
intervention, for some.
FFAP, giving each an appropriate risk rating. This ensures that high-risk
concerns are prioritised and decision-making is informed by the timely collation
of police-held information. Victims are supported well by specialist staff.
Additional funding has recently been secured to develop a range of initiatives to
provide additional support for families experiencing domestic abuse, including
programmes for non-convicted perpetrators. Operation Encompass ensures that
schools in the pilot programme receive early alerts on children experiencing
domestic abuse in the home environment. Schools report favourably on this
initiative, saying that they are able to support these children better.
multi-agency public protection arrangements, assess and manage risk
effectively for families with complex multiple needs. These include domestic
abuse, substance misuse and parental mental ill health. These forums are well
coordinated, held frequently in response to increasing demand and well
attended by relevant agencies, including the voluntary sector. Together, these
agencies offer a range of preventative and creative support services for children
and families, including education and awareness-raising programmes, specialist
independent advisors, refuge provision and outreach support.
seamlessly with daytime services, providing appropriate advice and guidance to
professionals and members of the public. Issues that occur out of hours are
followed up promptly, ensuring that risks are identified and appropriate
interventions put in place. Effective use is made of an emergency bed for
children and families in crisis, including for children at risk of being held
overnight in custody.
agencies, and consider all risks effectively. Good account is taken of the views
of children and parents. Decisions to proceed to a child protection conference
after safeguarding investigations are appropriate.
analysis. Others are overly descriptive, without sufficient emphasis on analysing
the childs and familys situation. Too many assessments take too long to be
completed. They are not always updated in response to significant change to
the childs circumstances. These factors means that some children and families
wait too long for actions to address their needs, and intervention plans do not
always reflect current risks and protective factors.


consider risk and protective factors, which helps professionals to articulate the
concerns that they have in an easily understandable way. This helps parents to
understand what professionals are worried about. However, some assessments
are over-optimistic about parents capacity to change. Assessments do not
always consider childrens and parents individual characteristics, including their
ethnicity and cultural heritage.
to express their wishes and feelings via electronic communication tools. Their
views inform child protection conferences, and attendance at conferences is
encouraged, sometimes with the support of a trained advocate. Child protection
conferences are timely. Chairs take care to ensure that the families who attend
understand what is being said. This assists with their ability to engage in safety
planning. Poor practice by professionals is challenged appropriately by chairs.
The child protection panel, which meets regularly, ensures that plans are
carefully considered prior to conference.
Danger statements within plans provide some clarity about what needs to
change to make improvements to childrens lives. In a small number of cases,
children have remained on a child in need plan when a more serious
intervention was required. Plans are not always updated or specific enough
about timescales, contingency arrangements and how to measure progress.
(Recommendation)
for children. Training, awareness raising and tools have been launched across
the partnership. However, the take-up of the neglect assessment tool remains
low within social care and other childrens services, including education and
health. However, neglect is identified using the local authoritys wider preferred
model of social work practice. Childrens cases were seen in which appropriate
responses to neglect are underway, including instigating legal proceedings.
Inspectors agreed with local authority audits, which identified previous missed
opportunities.
arrangements in the local authority area has enabled an increasing emphasis on
prevention, while also coordinating plans for children at higher risk. Operation
Priam, jointly delivered by police officers and specialist youth workers, is
effective and engages well with children who are at risk of being exploited.
Individual risk assessments capture both risks and protective factors well, are
updated regularly and inform discussion at frequent multi-agency child
exploitation (MACE) meetings. However, the risk assessment tool is lengthy and
does not always translate into effective plans. There is insufficient evidence that
the risk assessment process leads to significant change for high-risk children.
Minutes from the MACE meetings are lengthy and provide a narrative about the
young person and their circumstances, but they lack clarity about next steps


and timescales, and do not evidence impact or a reduction in risk over time for
some children. (Recommendation)
promptly at FFAP via the missing notification inbox. A panel regularly reviews
cases of children who go missing in order to check that their plans are
appropriate and are meeting their needs. Debriefings with children upon their
return are completed by specialist staff from the Young and safe team, who
are independent of the social work service. Debriefings are detailed and capture
the views of the child. However, they are not always timely or sufficiently
analytical about the push and pull factors, and what needs to happen to keep
children safe. Debriefings do not always clearly inform the planning process,
and are difficult to locate on the childs electronic case record.
education. The vast majority are highly likely to have moved abroad. This
unusual profile is attributed to economic migration to and from the local area.
The team deploys creative and tenacious strategies to successfully locate these
children and obtain the address of their overseas schools.
who are electively home educated (EHE). The number of registered EHE
children is 165 and has increased each year. Good efforts have been made to
understand the reasons for this rise, and a recent Local Safeguarding Children
Board audit pointed to unresolved issues with the school and/or levels of
anxiety in children about key transition points. It is too early to see the impact
of the action plan drawn up in response to this audit. All children are regularly
reviewed when academic progress and emotional well-being are discussed.
Good links are in place with the local college, and increasing numbers of former
EHE children are attending the 14 to 16 provision at the college. The young
persons support service provides advice and guidance to all EHE pupils about
suitable post-16 provision. Children are supported well to reintegrate into
mainstream provision or further education.
supported to access appropriate accommodation in accordance with a clear
local protocol. Those who are assessed as being vulnerable or at risk are
provided with additional support through a child in need plan or, if necessary,
entry into care.
cases. Private fostering is not well promoted and it is not a priority for the local
authority or its statutory partners. This means that children who are privately
fostered remain unknown, their needs are not assessed and additional support
is not provided when necessary. (Recommendation)
adults who work or volunteer with children. In most of the cases sampled,
referrals were responded to promptly and on a multi-agency basis.


thorough assessments and detailed support plans. Transition to adult social
care is supported well with early planning. Case records show good accounts of
childrens needs and social workers make considerable efforts to ensure that
childrens views are elicited whenever possible, and that these inform their
assessments, plans and reviews.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Decisions that children should be looked after are usually appropriate and timely.
In a small number of cases seen, there were delays in intervening. Children are
not looked after unnecessarily. Court work, such as written evidence and plans, is
improving and nearly all care order applications are successful. Plans for children
to return home from care are effective, with ongoing support and monitoring of
progress.
Social workers know children well. They visit them regularly and make sure that
their voices are heard. Children receive good health support, including help to
meet their emotional and mental health needs. Children are helped to understand
and make sense of their past history, although occasionally this work is delayed.
Not enough children are able to benefit from the support of an independent visitor.
Successful work has led to more foster carers being available for children.
Decisions about where children should live are carefully considered, and placement
stability is improving. Children are very positive about where they live and the
majority make good progress. Foster carers are well supported and feel valued.
The educational progress of each child is carefully tracked. If children are not
making expected progress, good support is put in place to promote improvement.
Overall, current progress across all key stages is positive. IROs come to know their
children well and rigorously monitor the progress of childrens plans between
reviews. Reviews are timely and well attended by relevant professional staff and
family members.
There are several useful mechanisms in place for the local authority to learn from
children about their experiences in care. However, the CfCC is underdeveloped.
Senior corporate parents need stronger links with the CfCC to ensure that it can
properly represent childrens views and contribute to service development.
Early permanence is well established, and children move to live with permanent
families without delay. Adoption is considered for all children who would benefit
from this, and the adoption service ensures the best outcomes for these children.
Care leavers have trusting, long-standing relationships with their PAs and can
access a range of good support services. They live in safe and supportive housing
and are helped to develop independence skills. Those who attend college are well
supported. However, too many care leavers, particularly those aged 19 to 21, are
NEET.


Inspection findings
carefully considered, based on clear evidence and a balanced analysis of risk. In
a small number of cases seen, there were missed opportunities to intervene
earlier, despite escalating concerns or lack of progress. These few children did
not have their outcomes improved quickly enough.
Statements for court are clear and of good quality. The vast majority of
applications are accepted by the courts. The average length of time for
completing care proceedings, at 30 weeks, is outside the required timeframe
but close to the national average. Partners, including the Children and Family
Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), recognise the overall
improvement of the local authoritys work in legal proceedings for children,
although there is still a need to ensure consistency of practice across the
service.
Support is sensitive to their individual needs and stage of development.
Children, including the few who live far from their home area, are visited
regularly and seen alone. Social workers record their purposeful visits to
children well, with a strong emphasis on including childrens views.
professionals to understand and respond to childrens views, wishes and
feelings. Planning consistently includes a requirement for life-story work in
order to help children to make sense of their past. The majority of life-story
work seen by inspectors was good but, in several cases, completion had been
delayed.
relationship with an independent visitor. However, advocacy take-up is low.
Only a very small number of children are currently matched to an independent
visitor. (Recommendation)
direction. There is insufficiently wide representation of children in care and care
leavers in this group, and no succession planning to ensure that there are
always children who can raise issues on behalf of the wider group. The vast
majority of children and young people in care do not participate in formal
groups that are intended to have influence and to pass information between
senior officers and members, and this is a shortfall. (Recommendation)
all children receive prompt health assessments and dental checks, although
initial health assessments for children living outside the local authority area are
often late. The local authority and its health partners are taking steps to


improve this to ensure that all children have timely assessments. Support for
children from the child and adolescent mental health services is highly valued
by professional staff and foster carers. It is flexible and timely, and promotes
stability. Good work is undertaken with carers and staff to help them to
understand and respond appropriately to specific behaviours. The annual health
fun day gives children in care the opportunity to experience a range of
enjoyable, positive activities and to tell staff what they think about the help and
care that they receive.
appropriately inform interventions to meet childrens emotional health needs.
Analysis of SDQ responses has led to service improvements, including better
access to support for children who are subject to special guardianship and child
arrangement orders, or who live with family and friends carers.
headteacher, supports 219 statutory school-aged children and 24 young people
attending full-time post-16 provision. Personal education plans are good and
are regularly reviewed. They provide a vivid picture of individual childrens
progress, including their social and emotional well-being, academic abilities and
attitude to learning. The plans show how the pupil premium is being used to
improve progress. When children are not making expected levels of progress,
LACE staff identify and agree support strategies with the school, foster parents
and carers to promote improvement. Attendance is high at primary school, at
continuing improvement in attendance.
authority area, attend schools that were judged as good or outstanding at their
last inspection. However, only 52% of secondary pupils living in the local
authority area attend good or better schools, reflecting the inspection outcomes
of schools in North East Lincolnshire. Appropriate actions to mitigate this are
taken. For example, those children attending a local academy that was recently
judged to require improvement have been individually assessed on the
suitability of the school and/or additional support that they might need to
ensure that their progress is maintained.
current Year 11 children are now in mainstream provision. At least half are on
track to achieve some GCSEs and several are likely to achieve good grades,
including in English and mathematics. This will be a significant improvement
from last year, when the majority of Year 11 young people were not in
mainstream schools and were not entered for GCSE exams. As a consequence,
attainment at key stage 4 was poor. Attainment for the majority of children at
key stages 1 to 3 is at least in line with that of their peers in the local authority,
and they are making expected progress.
mainstream education and avoid exclusion. Despite this, 17% (38/219) have


experienced a fixed-term exclusion and three were permanently excluded last
year. These decisions are being appealed against and plans are in place to
provide them with suitable alternative provision in the future.
children spend between six and 12 weeks in alternative registered provision
and, whenever possible, return to mainstream schools. All provision is assured
for quality, and each young person has a bespoke offer.
Targeted and productive recruitment activity, such as monthly drop-ins at a
local supermarket, coupled with effective support for existing foster carers, has
resulted in a year-on-year increase in the number of carers to meet the needs
of children in care.
proportion of children who have been in the same placement for at least two
years or placed for adoption increased from 63% in 201516 to 68% in 2016
very small number of unplanned placement endings, are well analysed and
understood. Decisions about who should care for children are carefully
considered and clearly recorded. The vast majority of children in care live close
to their home area. Childrens contact with family and friends is well supported.
When possible, brothers and sisters are able to live together.
about where they are living, and the majority make good progress. The local
authoritys commitment to providing long-term stability is exemplified by
keeping children with their foster carers when this meets their needs.
assessments of their individual needs. Day-to-day arrangements are discussed
at placement planning meetings, although not always recorded on the
electronic file. For a few children, planning is too reactive or is insufficiently
focused on the longer term.
support that they receive from the local authority. They feel valued by staff,
including childrens social workers and senior managers, who they describe as
approachable. Foster carers are particularly well supported by their link officers,
whose supervisory visits to them are well recorded and purposeful, helping
carers to reflect upon and develop their practice.
benefit from a wide variety of training opportunities, which have good take-up.
Good support is available to family and friends carers, but take-up is lower. Not
all of these carers know about what is on offer, such as peer support groups.
The support needs of foster carers birth children are addressed well, including
through the Kids that care group.


decisions. Planning for childrens care is effective. In a small number of cases,
information for carers was not provided when the child first moved to live with
them. Risks are identified accurately, and the plans to manage those risks are
explicit, setting out what everybody is expected to do to keep children safe. A
minority of safety plans seen were not updated in line with changed
circumstances or emerging concerns.
support to children and families. In a small number of cases, there was
insufficient urgency to engage with, or challenge, partners to make sure that
the right help was in place promptly for children and carers.
and management directives routinely consider permanence for individual
children. Although records of case discussions are sometimes over descriptive,
the majority are suitably directive and focused. The resource allocation meeting
provides a further effective layer of oversight and assists prompt decisionmaking. Actions arising from resource allocation meetings do not always assign
a responsible person or expected timescale to each agreed action, which makes
it difficult to measure progress.
recommendations that help children to make progress. IROs are actively and
appropriately involved in case planning, including for those children in care
proceedings. The recently increased capacity of the IRO service has ensured
that IROs have manageable caseloads. They take time to know children well
and they rigorously monitor progress between reviews. Nearly all children
participate in and contribute to their reviews. There is similarly good
engagement with parents, including those who are resistant. Challenge from
IROs is proportionate and effective.
questionnaires and events such as the activity-based health fun day and art
day. Exit questionnaires, completed by children who have to move between
foster placements, give important insights into their experiences. The survey,
conducted by independent advocates, is a small but innovative example of
seeking childrens views to help to shape services. The mainly positive
responses from children have provided reassurance to the fostering service
about how moves are managed. The findings also include areas for
development, including an enhanced focus on childrens internet access and on
clearer explanations about the reasons for their placement moves. These are
appropriately being incorporated into the services development plan.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
children and adopters to ensure that children are able to benefit from living in a
permanent home.
children who are potentially unable to return to their birth family. Adoption
social workers begin planning for children at the earliest opportunity. Adoption
planning meetings carefully set out childrens backgrounds and future needs so
that family finding can begin swiftly, reducing the time before children move to
permanent homes.
facilities are used well to supplement the availability of adopters from within the
councils own resources and the local consortium.
reduce the number of carers in a childs life and assist the development of
attachments to their permanent carers. Adopters who had chosen this route
said that they felt well supported through the process.
recent years, with the focus switched to preparation for regionalisation, which is
expected to create a greater pool of potential adopters. Importantly, this has
not negatively impacted on the local authoritys ability to find children adoptive
families. Older children, groups of children and children who have more
complex health needs have also been successfully placed.
effective. The adoption tracker provides useful data on performance and
trends, and also flags issues which could cause delay, allowing them to be
addressed. Although adoption performance remains over government
thresholds for the three-year average, current performance has improved
significantly over the last two years.
entering care and moving in with their adoptive family was 475 days. This is a
vast improvement on its previous three-year average of 524 days for 201215
which, while higher, was still better than the national average of 593 days and
the statistical neighbour three-year average of 567 days.
are traditionally harder to place. During 201516, there were 35 children (20%)
aged five years or older who were adopted, compared to the rate for England
of 15%. Overall, in the 12 months before this inspection, there were 44
children who had a decision to adopt or who had been adopted.


representative. The panel scrutinises adoption practice  for example, regarding
timeliness of matters and the quality of reports  and provides feedback to
individuals to promote continuous improvement.
enhanced in other ways. For example, the twice-yearly panel chairs report
provides a useful overview of adoption activity and informs the agency
decision-maker, who also receives monthly updates from the agency advisor
and attends adoption panel training.
decisions regarding the suitability of adoption. However, they are not of a
consistently good standard. Some reports lack details of parents and older
brothers and sisters histories, despite these being available in case records.
This has implications for adopted individuals who may wish to view their
records at a later date to gain an understanding of their birth family history.
(Recommendation)
good account of a childs early history and the reasons why they were placed
for adoption.
clear rationales for recommendations. This supports appropriate matching of
adopters with children. Adoptive parents were very complimentary about the
service that they had received from the local authority throughout their
adoption journey. Adopters spoke highly of their social workers, describing
them as a great support at all times.
their adoptive families and is further assessed as required. Adoption support
plans are appropriate, reflective of individual circumstances and regularly
reviewed. Therapeutic support is available and the adoption support fund has
been successfully accessed. A range of support groups are well used and liked
by adopters, including a young persons group, an adopters group and family
time. The effectiveness of adoption support is reflected in the absence of any
disruptions for the past 18 months.
adoption social worker to discuss their support needs and a birth family support
group.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
know their young people very well, and relationships between PAs and care
leavers are trusting. PAs are good at keeping in touch with the 82 care leavers
whom they are supporting. As a result, only one care leaver is not in touch with
the through care service.
understanding of their rights and entitlements. Their achievements are
celebrated well at an annual award ceremony. They receive a range of awards
for academic progress, sporting achievement and making a positive
contribution. Young people who have gained degrees have come back to speak
at celebration events, helping to provide inspiration to others.
well supported and, as a result, the vast majority make steady progress
towards successful independence. They are helped to understand risks and are
guided to make positive choices in relation to their lifestyles and relationships.
One care leaver said: I feel very lucky that I can talk to my PA about anything,
that I am staying put with my foster carers and attending university. It makes
me feel normal, just like other people my age. This summarises what many
care leavers told inspectors.
to consider the consequence of their actions and builds resilience. Plans are
detailed and evaluative, providing sufficient information about what is going
well for the young person and where the challenges lie. Targets are realistic,
and realistic contingency plans are in place. Care leavers said that pathway
planning gives them a good opportunity to set some goals and think about
what is going well, what is not going well and what they should be aiming for.
They said that having a copy of their pathway plans means that they can see
what they have achieved. They liked the fact that PAs visit them to complete
their pathway plans and discuss what happens next.
range of health services are available to them. Care leavers take increasing
responsibility for their own health, but they are not given copies of their health
histories. They receive a health consultation before leaving care, but this is not
incorporated into pathway plans. This means that important information
regarding young peoples health is not recorded in a document that they can
keep and refer back to if necessary. (Recommendation)
accommodation. There is a wide range of flexible and bespoke housing options
available to them. Options include fully supported accommodation with other


alternatives, including floating support, at a reduced level of intensity. This
means that young people can be matched to different levels of support that is
appropriate to their needs. This helps to ensure that their self-help and
independent living skills develop at the pace appropriate to each individual.
of age is encouraged and considered at an early stage. Currently, six young
people, a good proportion, are benefiting from these arrangements, with more
planned. Carers are well supported to offer this option to young people. For
others  for example, those undertaking further education  the option to
return to foster carers during holiday periods is also available.
leavers. Accommodation providers and other partners keep everyone who is
involved updated about their progress. Many care leavers move successfully
into living on their own, and 38% of the current cohort are now living
independently. The local authoritys web-based housing application
arrangements ensure that care leavers housing applications are matched to the
most appropriate provider. Care leavers are given priority on the Home-Link
register.
custody. Resettlement into the community is prioritised, and plans are in place
to support them to return to the area once they are released. For one young
person, a bespoke housing option is being considered with one of the
commissioned providers.
education providers. This helps care leavers to make successful transitions into
further education, and they are fully informed of the financial support that they
are entitled to. College staff provide suitable and tailored support, and take
account of the particular challenges that young people face in their journey
through care. As a result, the vast majority of care leavers who are currently in
education, employment or training are attending further education
programmes.
care, including financial support, fee payments, a personal allowance, holiday
accommodation and ongoing personal support from their PA and/or foster
carer, ensure that these young people have every opportunity to achieve.
The local authority has a significant issue with unemployment and youth
unemployment across the wider population, and this is amplified for care
leavers. No care leaver has an apprenticeship with the council and only a very
small number of young people have been offered work experience, with an
even smaller number taking up internships.


managed to reduce the NEET rate. A high proportion of care leavers are NEET,
at 48% overall, rising to 58% for 19- to 21-year-olds. However, some of these
young people are not eligible for education, employment or training by virtue of
being in custody or being new parents. New initiatives, such as a project
targeting all such young people, including care leavers, are assisting six young
people back into education, employment or training. This is complemented by a
weekly careers advice drop-in for care leavers. These are sensible initiatives,
but it is too soon to see their full impact, and more robust action is required to
address this outcome for young people leaving care. (Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Good progress has been made in North East Lincolnshire since the last inspection
of childrens services in 2012. Senior leaders are responding to significant social
problems and deprivation by engaging with partners in the strategic planning of
services and focusing on those areas of greatest need. This is important, as the
local authority is the 20th most deprived in the country. Targeting of resources has
been assisted by a comprehensive needs assessment and good commissioning
arrangements. The local authority has been successful in attracting funding to
support these plans. Partners, including the police, have reconfigured resources to
maximise impact on the most vulnerable sections of the community.
The authority knows itself well. It has good performance information and a robust
quality assurance framework, enabling it to identify areas of strength as well as
areas for improvement.
The local authority has engaged all partners well in its work to safeguard children,
including arrangements for missing children and those at risk of child sexual
exploitation. The authority understands the risks posed by child sexual exploitation
and is active in raising awareness of these issues in schools and in the wider
community.
Children are kept safe in North East Lincolnshire, but there is limited effectiveness
in some cases. Not all vulnerable childrens assessments and plans are progressed
swiftly enough. Private fostering is not promoted.
Work to identify those young people at risk of radicalisation is well developed and
results in appropriate interventions. Support is provided to schools to assist in
raising awareness.
Outcomes for children in care are positive, with placement stability improving and
permanency being considered, and achieved, for many. Care leavers receive good
support, but too few benefit from being in education, employment or training.
Actions taken to establish a successful workforce strategy, together with a
comprehensive training offer, have made the local authority a more attractive
place to work. As a result, staff turnover has been reduced by over half in the last
two years.
More work needs to be done to ensure that the wishes and feelings of children in
care are heard and taken into account, particularly in the work of the corporate
parenting and childrens services scrutiny panels. The CfCC has insufficient
influence, and needs to be developed and better supported.


Inspection findings
inspection of childrens services in 2012. In particular, senior leaders
demonstrate vision and strategic awareness in responding to key areas of need
in the authority. Ambitious plans to tackle endemic deprivation and associated
social problems are well advanced. They demonstrate an awareness of deeprooted problems in local communities and an understanding of the need to
tackle these jointly with other agencies. The DCS and the chief executive,
together with political leaders, are aware of their respective responsibilities and
the priorities for childrens services. An understanding of the importance of
synergy in planning and use of resources is demonstrated by the creation of a
single leadership team and joint board that encompasses both the local
authority and the clinical commissioning group.
assessment. This has enabled well-informed commissioning of services,
supported by a robust commissioning strategy. Alignment with the sufficiency
strategy ensures that appropriate services are available to children and families,
and further services are planned in response to emerging needs. The impact of
the Health and Wellbeing Board is less clear, with an out-of-date strategy and a
lack of focus on some key areas of vulnerability for young people, such as
mental health and neglect, although services for children in these areas are
being delivered nonetheless. (Recommendation)
established. These include regular meetings with the DCS and an annual
meeting with the chief executive to evaluate the performance of the
independent chair.
the age range of 0 to 19 was conducted through a well-planned and executed
commissioning approach. The rebalancing of services is intended to increase
the focus on prevention and reduce the demand on statutory social care
services. Some programmes and services are already in place, including early
help hubs, a programme for vulnerable women and family group conferencing.
wards in the local authority area. The police have refocused resources into
these areas, and joint work with social workers, specialist youth workers and
others is showing improved outcomes for individual young people and their
families. These initiatives are too new to see the longer-term impact, but early
signs are encouraging, with more partners, such as the fire service and housing
workers, keen to support targeted interventions in families. The initiative is
benefiting from long-term investment from a national voluntary organisation,
including evaluating the impact of this localised approach to multiple adversity
and the prevention of neglect.


identified areas of need. This includes funding from the clinical commissioning
group, the local crime commissioner, safer and stronger communities and
national funding to tackle violence against women and girls. These successful
bids have enabled the development of, for example, programmes for nonconvicted domestic abuse perpetrators. This is reinforcing an already broad
range of services to tackle domestic abuse, embed a social work practice
model, and deliver family group conferencing and restorative practice.
performance measures. Despite cumbersome IT systems, key performance data
is successfully extracted. This allows trends and themes in practice to be seen,
including those areas which require improvement. Information is available to
frontline managers and staff on the timeliness of completion of assessments
and reports. This is useful to remind staff and managers of outstanding tasks.
However, despite this information flow, some performance issues, such as the
timeliness of single assessment completions, remain poor.
activity. Social work case auditing highlights areas of strength and areas in
which practice needs to improve. The local authoritys own auditing of work
closely corresponds to findings in this inspection. Key points for learning are
identified through a performance board and shared with staff. The local
authority also provides the Local Safeguarding Children Board with findings
from its audits, ensuring that the board is aware of the quality and impact of
safeguarding practice within childrens social care.
police are committed, strong partners and work closely with childrens services,
resulting in effective joined-up services for children, particularly in the delivery
of the FFAP and the arrangements for missing children and those at risk of child
sexual exploitation.
effectiveness in a few childrens cases. Not all childrens plans are progressed in
a timely way, leading to some children being on plans too long and their
outcomes not improving quickly enough. Management oversight, while evident,
is not always effective  for example, in ensuring that plans are specific,
measurable, have timescales and assign responsibilities. Supervision of social
workers is regular, but records of supervision are sometimes overly descriptive
at the expense of reflection and analysis of case progress. Private fostering is
not promoted, and no children are currently being supported in a private
fostering arrangement.
exploitation are well coordinated and deliver focused, multi-agency responses
to safeguard children. This includes awareness raising in schools and with taxi
drivers, fast-food outlets and, more recently, commercial accommodation
providers and hoteliers. The established outreach services operated by the


police and the Young and safe team during the busy summer months in
Grimsby and Cleethorpes are effective. These services support young people
attracted to the seafront, including those who are missing, at risk of child
sexual exploitation or otherwise vulnerable.
the prevalence and nature of child sexual exploitation in the area, informed by
a detailed and comprehensive problem profile. This ensures that strategic
responses match current risks. Children who go missing from home or care
benefit from joint work between the local authority and the police, and are all
tracked. Children receive appropriate, although not always timely, return home
interviews from the Young and safe team. The local authority and the police
have been active in pursuing prosecutions and applying successfully for child
abduction notices, with 22 issued in 201617. However, while MACE meetings
occur regularly, the minutes and risk assessments do not show the progress of
the most vulnerable children and young people, and the extent of improvement
or deterioration needs to be clearer. There are regular, lengthy multi-agency
discussions about each young person. Staff know them well and can describe
what actions are in place for each young person. However, it is not clear from
the records if this leads to increased safety and reduced risks.
has been done to raise both awareness and competence in social workers and
other staff who work with children. This has been assisted by embedding a
recognised social work model of practice, a multi-agency neglect strategy and
tool, and practice guidance. Childrens cases were seen in which neglect had
been identified through the local authoritys preferred social work model of
practice, but use of the neglect assessment tool remains low.
support for foster carers, is sufficient to ensure stable and lasting placements
for all children. The local authority exceeds its target of providing at least 80%
of placements in-house, and usually meets 90% or better. Additional capacity is
sought, when necessary, through a regional consortium providing residential
and foster placements.
Care leavers are supported well, but more needs to be done to ensure greater
participation and success in apprenticeships and permanent employment.
concerns about radicalisation. Careful analysis of the local authority area has
identified adult mental health and young peoples social isolation and
deprivation as features of those who are at risk of, or already hold, extreme
views. All schools have held workshops and are given a 12-week lesson plan on
radicalisation. Local minority ethnic communities have been engaged in this
work, including leaders of the two local mosques.


Training provided under the auspices of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
is comprehensive. The two local universities both support new social workers
completing their first year in employment and provide professional career
development for experienced staff. The local authority has succeeded in
reducing the overall turnover of staff from 32% in September 2014 to 13.5% in
September 2016.
its legal department. Cafcass senior staff report that the overall quality of work
in the local authority is improving but that there is still some variability.
Performance in timeliness of care proceedings is at 30 weeks, which shows a
deterioration from 26 weeks a year ago, attributed to five particularly complex
cases. The vast majority of applications by the local authority are accepted by
the courts.
childrens services through local democratic arrangements. However, there is
insufficient focus on the voice of children in care and whether their outcomes
are improving. The scrutiny panels programme of work does not include a
focus on children in care. The corporate parenting board, also regularly
attended by the chief executive, does not hear from the CfCC or find other
ways to elicit the views of children in care and care leavers. This means that
the corporate parenting panel cannot ensure compliance with the corporate
parenting pledge. (Recommendations)
views clearly recorded on case notes and through use of an electronic survey
tool. This tool captures childrens views at key decision-making points, such as
child protection conferences and looked after reviews. There is an established
compliments and complaints process, which leads to clear action plans for
change, when necessary. Learning from complaints is clearly set out and
actions are pursued to completion. However, the collective views of children in
receipt of social work services are not systematically gathered to influence
strategic development and service delivery.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
to be good
Executive summary
The North East Lincolnshire Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement to
be good. The board is meeting its statutory responsibilities. Effective governance
arrangements are in place, and the board oversees local safeguarding
arrangements, such as the response to child sexual exploitation.
The board does not collect all the performance information that it needs, and
board members do not routinely review the performance information that is
available. This hampers its ability to scrutinise partner agencies and hold each to
account. The audit programme provides some assurance about the effectiveness of
local safeguarding practice in partner agencies. However, the board does not have
oversight of all the risks that might reduce the ability of partner agencies to
safeguard children.
Most partners are well represented on the board and attendance is good. The
executive and operational boards are supported by a well-developed sub-group
structure, which ensures that the board is able to deliver its work programme. The
boards website includes helpful safeguarding updates, alongside reports on recent
audits and SCRs. Up-to-date multi-agency procedures are easily accessible.
However, these are not promoting the safety and welfare of children who are
privately fostered. The boards annual report does not include all key areas of
safeguarding practice.
The child death overview panel (CDOP) is well developed and effective. The board,
supported by the SCR sub-group, has taken appropriate steps to disseminate
learning from SCRs. However, the national panel of independent experts is not
routinely informed of cases considered by this sub-group.
Robust strategic and operational arrangements safeguard and protect children who
go missing, are at risk of child sexual exploitation or are at risk of being
radicalised. While young people are increasingly involved in the work of the board,
key information about the experiences of children, such as children in care, is not
considered by the board.
An up-to-date, multi-agency threshold document is in place, and the board has
taken steps to ensure that it has an understanding of how consistently this is being
applied.
Although a process for undertaking and learning from multi-agency section 11
audits is in place, and assurance regarding safeguarding in schools is received
annually, the board has not received similar assurance from other services, such as
early years providers, libraries or leisure services.


Recommendations


Ensure that board partners have sufficient understanding of performance
information to challenge and hold each other to account for safeguarding
services effectively.



The LSCB should be assured that the time allocated to the chairs role is
sufficient to meet the needs of the board in executing its full range of
responsibilities.



Monitor risks in all partner agencies that have the potential to impact on the
agencys capacity to safeguard and promote childrens welfare.



Monitor the effectiveness of safeguarding practice in wider services that work
directly with children and young people, such as early years settings, libraries
and leisure services.



Enable the experiences of children in need and in care to be heard by the board
so that the quality and effectiveness of frontline services can be understood and
challenged, as necessary.



Develop clear processes for notifying serious incidents involving children to both
Ofsted and the Serious Case Review National Panel, and for determining when
the criteria are met for commissioning an SCR or other learning lessons review.



Ensure that private fostering is promoted.



Report annually on the effectiveness of safeguarding services, including frontline
practice, private fostering, learning from SCRs and learning from child deaths.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
responsibilities, and clear governance arrangements between the board and the
local authority are in place. The chair meets regularly with the director of
childrens services, who is also the deputy chief executive and is accountable to
the chief executive. There is a well-developed structure and a protocol setting
out the relationships between different strategic boards. Communication
channels are established between the board and its sub-groups, ensuring that
priorities and work plans are shared.
level on the board. Attendance is good, and they are able to influence
safeguarding practice within their own agencies and challenge each other to
improve services for vulnerable children. The chair holds agencies to account
for services in key areas, such as children at risk of sexual exploitation.
Engagement by schools and colleges, including the independent sector, is
particularly strong, evidenced by an active education sub-group and school
safeguarding leads network. However, the board has not ensured
representation from schools on the executive or operational boards.


issues identified in audits or performance information. This leads to
improvements in multi-agency practice. Partners are expected to report any
known risks that may have an impact on their agencys safeguarding
performance, but these are not included in the challenge log. The absence of a
comprehensive shared risk register means that the board does not have an
overview of risks across the partnership and cannot ensure that these are
addressed. (Recommendation)
some services and improvement activity, such as early help services. However,
the board does not scrutinise other important data, such as the timeliness of
health assessments for children in care or the proportion of referrals to
specialist childrens services that result in child protection enquiries and plans.
In addition, the executive and operational boards receive a performance
summary report rather than directly scrutinise performance scorecards. The
independent chair does not attend the operational board. These issues combine
to reduce the boards accountability and its ability to identify and respond to
themes, trends or issues in service provision. (Recommendations)
Learning from audits and SCRs is well publicised. The multi-agency threshold
document is available and the board has tested the consistency of its
application. Findings have led to a stronger escalation process and more activity
to increase agencies understanding of the application of thresholds.
events and developing child-friendly tools. However, the board does not receive
information about complaints, advocacy or the annual survey of children who
are in need or looked after. (Recommendation)
children and young people who go missing or who are at risk of sexual
exploitation. Considerable work has also been undertaken to promote
awareness and improve the local response to radicalisation. Responses to
children who go missing, including the timeliness of return home interviews, are
reported to the board regularly. Significant awareness-raising and preventative
work has been undertaken to improve the resilience of children and develop the
skills and knowledge of staff to respond to potential child sexual exploitation.
Training and awareness raising have taken place for taxi drivers, fast-food
outlets, hoteliers and business owners. Regular, joint work between local
authority youth workers and police officers is undertaken to reduce risk and
build the resilience of children and young people. However, the work of the
MACE group is not quality assured by the board, and current performance
information does not help the board to understand its effectiveness in reducing
risk for the most vulnerable children.


audits provide an in-depth understanding of the effectiveness of frontline
practice, identify relevant learning and make recommendations to improve
multi-agency working. Actions are tracked to ensure compliance. The board
also receives the findings and action plans from single-agency audits, which
provides assurance that agencies interrogate practice within their own
organisations.
review and provides assurance of safeguarding arrangements within agencies.
Schools report annually on their safeguarding practice, which is positive.
However, other settings, such as nurseries, libraries and leisure services, are
not asked to evaluate or report on their safeguarding practice.
(Recommendation)
fostering, nor challenged the local authority on its inactivity. There have been
no notifications in recent months and there are no private fostering
arrangements in place at the time of the inspection. (Recommendation)
deaths. The annual report is appropriately detailed and reflects the work
undertaken by the CDOP. Public health campaigns, service reviews and training
opportunities have been undertaken as a consequence of learning from child
deaths.
impact on practice is monitored. Two learning reviews have recently been
completed. However, the national panel of independent experts and Ofsted
were not informed of these, and were also not informed of previous instances
of learning reviews held. (Recommendation)
boards priorities and wider learning. Training, tools and a professional
capability framework are being rolled out to improve the response to neglect.
However, use of the preferred neglect assessment tool remains low. Evaluation
of the impact of training on frontline practice has been limited, and this has
been identified as an area for further development.
progress made. However, it lacks analysis of the effectiveness of practice and
wider partner agency effectiveness. The report comments on the management
of allegations against professionals, but does not include private fostering or
learning from case reviews and child deaths. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the differences that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and an Ofsted inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle
Team inspectors: Anji Parker, Peter McEntee, Matthew Brazier, Matthew Reed, Pam
Blackman (OI), Lorna Schlechte, Nicola Bennett and Caroline Walsh
Senior data analysts: Peter McLaughlin and Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Bob Morton


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


