Nottinghamshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 May 2015  4 June 2015
Report published: 20 July 2015

Childrens services in Nottinghamshire County Council are good
Good leadership means that children and young people are protected, the risks to
them are identified and managed through timely decisions and the help provided
reduces the risk of, or actual, harm to them.
Children and young people looked after, those returning home and those moving to
or living in permanent placements outside of their immediate birth family have their
welfare safeguarded and promoted.


Good

permanence

Good


Good


Requires
Improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates seven childrens homes, including one secure unit.
Six were judged to be good or outstanding at their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 An inspection of safeguarding and arrangements for looked after children took
place in March 2010 and found overall effectiveness of safeguarding services to
be inadequate. The overall effectiveness of services for looked after children was
judged to be adequate.
 A follow up inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children took place in September 2011. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
Local leadership
 The Acting Director of Childrens Services has been in post since April 2015.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2009.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 162,500 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Nottinghamshire. This is 20.5% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 17% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 12% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
any other white, white and black Caribbean and any other mixed background.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 6% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 4% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 4,287 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 31 March 2015, 692 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 587 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31 March 2015, 14 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a reduction from 21 at 31 March 2014.
 Since the last inspection, 10 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and seven serious case reviews have been completed or were on-going at
the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 841 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 826 (51 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014.
 Of this number, 291 (or 35%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 five live in residential special schools3, of whom four (80%) live out of
the authority area
area
 six live with parents, of whom four (67%) live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 97 adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


independent living
living in houses of multiple occupation.


Executive summary
Enduring stability in the senior leadership team over the last five years, combined
with strong and active involvement by elected members, have seen the county
council respond very effectively to poor findings from previous inspections. A
substantial financial investment, a clear focus on what needed to be done and a
determination to improve services for children and families have resulted in
significant progress being made. Improvements to the way childrens services are
now delivered are evident in the number of children currently receiving a service that
meets their identified needs. Performance management information is used well,
although there is more to be achieved in exploring the impact of early help services.
Robust senior management oversight, a renewed focus on social work practice and
an effective case auditing programme have seen the council respond positively to a
history of poor practice, which left some children living for far too long in neglectful
and challenging circumstances. An increase in the number of children on child
protection plans, children being appropriately looked after and an improving picture
of looked after children living much closer to home, mean that children are now safer
and better protected.
Developing a workforce with sufficient capacity, skills and expertise to support
children and families has been a challenge and remains so. Competing for
experienced social workers with neighbouring authorities has contributed to a
commitment by the council to improve the working environment. Effective support
packages, including practice consultants working within teams to improve
consistency of practice, effective caseload management, better technical support for
remote working and the introduction of business support services in some teams
have all been implemented successfully. The reliance on agency staff is reducing.
The transformation programme has led to a reconfiguration of service delivery. New
structures are now well embedded, including a single point of entry for contacts and
referrals through a well-established multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). The
multi-agency threshold for services document Pathway to Provision is well
understood. There is a good range of support services to help children and families.
Children living in households where domestic violence, mental health issues and
substance misuse are prevalent are well supported. However, the waiting list for
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services is too long. Delays have occurred in
completing assessments for children and young people who are privately fostered.
Children missing from home, care and education and those at risk of being sexually
exploited are known about and well supported. Return home interviews are
influential in identifying patterns of behaviour and support careful planning to further
reduce risks. Information gathered is used well to inform multi-agency operational
hot spot meetings.
Social work practice is effective and well-managed, with good outcomes being
achieved for children and young people. Children are seen and seen alone, their
wishes and feelings are known and understood and their views are generally


reflected well in assessments and decisions being made about them. Cases being
stepped-down to early help provision or stepped-up for social care intervention are
managed effectively. Diversity is addressed well, including the use of interpreters,
placement matching and work with unaccompanied asylum seeking children.
Management oversight of case work is good. Some practice is less robust with some
assessments being too descriptive and lacking sufficient analysis. Strategy
discussions do not routinely include education and health partners and recording is
not sufficiently detailed. Police do not routinely attend initial and review child
protection conferences.
Strong collaborative arrangements with the Nottinghamshire Safeguarding Children
Board have seen learning from case audits and outcomes from national and local
serious case reviews support further improvements to social work practice.
Families on the edge of care are well supported. When children cannot remain with
their families, court processes supported by legal planning meetings and the Public
Law Outline are effective and timely. Many more children and young people are now
entering care at the right time and for the right reasons. Looked after children and
young people genuinely enjoy good relationships with their social workers.
Improvements are required to ensure that the health needs of looked after children
are met, such as dental checks and immunisations. The virtual school is tenacious in
ensuring that looked after children and young people make better progress in their
learning. It monitors the progress and achievement of young people well, attendance
at school is good and performance at most key stages is improving.
Nottinghamshire Adoption Service is highly effective. A dedicated specialist Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) for looked after and adopted children,
sensitive and well-illustrated life story books and effective post-adoption support are
outstanding features of the service. However, despite the councils best efforts in
family finding, a small number of children continue to experience some delay in
finding permanent families and are left in uncertain situations for too long.
Services for care leavers have yet to benefit fully from the transformation
programme, which initially focused on the immediate priorities to safeguard children
and young people. Their lack of inclusion, until quite recently, in the looked after
children and care leavers strategy indicates that their needs have not received high
priority. The Corporate Parenting Sub-Committee has not had sufficient oversight of
services for care leavers. Improvements have yet to be made to the quality of
pathway plans, and care leavers do not routinely receive copies of their health
history. Action is being taken to improve the range of accommodation available.
Information regarding some care leavers such as those at risk of sexual exploitation
is not analysed so that resources can be targeted more effectively.
Children and young people feel valued and know that their views are incorporated
into service delivery. They are justifiably proud of the contribution they make to
support service improvement.


Recommendations

Ensure that care leavers are given information about their health histories and
that work is completed to understand the health needs of care leavers so that
resources can be better targeted. (Paragraphs 101 - 103)


Ensure that pathway plans are more specific regarding actions and timescales
and that work is followed up and reviewed regularly. (Paragraphs 104 - 105)


Gather and use management information pertaining to care leavers who are
missing, at risk of sexual exploitation, substance misusers or offenders, to
understand needs and allocate resources. (Paragraph 109)


Implement, monitor and review the 16+ accommodation strategy and engage
with providers, district and borough councils to drive improvements.
(Paragraph 106)


Review the effectiveness of the Corporate Parenting Sub-Committee to ensure
that it has active oversight of services for care leavers. (Paragraph 109)


Raise the awareness of private fostering and improve the response and
timeliness of assessments when arrangements are identified. (Paragraph 46)


Ensure that the collection and analysis of information about the effectiveness
and impact of the councils arrangements for services to children and young
people who receive early help are improved to better inform practice and
service development. (Paragraph 17)


Ensure that relevant partner agencies are included in child protection strategy
discussions, initial and review conferences so that decisions and investigations
are fully informed and benefit from their knowledge and information.
(Paragraphs 22 - 23)


Improve the consistency of social work practice across the service with regard
to recording and the quality of analysis in assessments. (Paragraphs 22, 24)

and young people are provided promptly when required. (Paragraph 32)
immunisations and the completion rates of the strengths and difficulties
questionnaire, to better inform the overall health needs of looked after children.
(Paragraphs 56, 57)


Summary for children and young people
 In 2009 and 2010 we found that services in Nottinghamshire for children who
needed help and protection were poor. At our inspections in February 2011 and
September 2011 we found that the council had made considerable progress in
improving services. In this inspection we found that most services for children
and young people are now good. Council leaders and managers are determined
to improve services even further and they are doing well.
 The council knows what it still needs to do to further improve services for
children and young people, and managers are taking effective action to address
the weaknesses that are still there. They know that services for care leavers have
not had high priority, as they have been making sure that other areas of the
service were safe. They agree that they need to do more to improve these
services and they are taking action to do this very quickly. Care leavers who
spoke to inspectors said they feel safe, but services for them are not yet good
enough.
 Managers know that young people wait too long when they have emotional or
mental health problems, and they have a plan to improve this.
 When people report a serious worry about a child, staff act quickly to help keep
children safe.
 Young people, parents, social workers, teachers, police officers and other
professionals have all been given lots of information about how to help keep
children and young people safe if they are at risk of sexual exploitation. They are
working well together to reduce the dangers and risk to children and young
people.
 Social workers work hard to find permanent families for children who need them
and more children are now moving to live with an adoptive family or other family
members or friends.
 Social workers spend a lot of time talking to the children and young people they
work with to try to understand what their lives are like. This helps them make
better decisions that make a difference to children and young peoples lives.
 Childrens and young peoples views are important to the council. No Labels (the
children in care council), and Young Pioneers, a group for young people with
additional needs, have worked hard with the council to change and develop
services. This has led to a review of the Pledge to looked after children, the
production of a DVD as part of an anti-bullying campaign, and the opportunity to
shape new health services.
 Managers in childrens services are good at checking that the social workers do
what they should do to help children and keep them safe.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children, young people and families in Nottinghamshire receive help and protection
from agencies in a timely way. Thresholds for services are well understood and
applied appropriately.
Early help services delivered by childrens centres, targeted support, supporting
families and family resource services are accessible and address a wide range of
needs. In addition, the commissioning and development of early help services mean
that children who do not meet the threshold for social work services receive timely
and appropriate help.
Almost all children who need help and protection are allocated to a social worker
without delay and receive timely assessments which inform good child protection and
children in need plans. The quality of assessments is good in the majority of cases
and none seen by inspectors was inadequate. However, achieving greater
consistency in the quality of assessments is an area for development, as is the
timeliness of assessments of children who are privately fostered.
Childrens plans, including child in need plans, are now consistently good. Social
workers are responsible for developing childrens plans, which are then subject to
effective regular management oversight and quality assurance. Decision making,
management oversight and supervision are areas of strength.
Multi-agency working, especially in child in need cases, is good and partners are
consulted before major changes are made to a childs plan. However, strategy
discussions do not routinely involve all relevant agencies and are not recorded in
sufficient detail. The police do not routinely attend initial and review child protection
conferences.
Childrens voices are heard, well-recorded and respected.
Investment in technology, workforce capacity, business support staff and practice
consultants have all had a positive impact on improving morale and social work
practice in front line teams.
Children and young people who go missing from home and children who are at risk
of sexual exploitation receive well-planned and coordinated help and protection. This
is underpinned by consistent and accountable strategic planning and multi-agency
oversight, including case audits, training and the development of practice standards.
The council uses management information well to promote good outcomes for
children and to drive up standards and performance. However, information about the
impact of early help and child sexual exploitation services is not fully utilised to
ensure that resources are targeted effectively.
Waiting lists for Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services are unacceptably long.
The council is working with health partners to reduce waiting times for treatment.


Inspection findings
from the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). The service is well organised
and consists of workers with a broad range of experience and skills. This
enables them to understand the needs of children, young people and their
families and to refer them for the right support. The addition of a social worker
to the team strengthens oversight and the quality of decision-making. This has
resulted in a greater confidence to assess and manage risk appropriately within
the unit.
younger children, and through the integrated targeted support teams and youth
justice service for older children. Three targeted support teams enable families
to have access to services in their local area. Three county-wide specialist
teams conduct parenting assessments, undertake return interviews for children
and young people who go missing from home and deliver help to young people
who experience homelessness or substance misuse.
Outcomes for children and young people who received help from targeted
support teams were good. Figures from the last three months show that
children aged 12-16 years are by far the highest group (57%) in receipt of early
help support. In 2014-15, 2,667 early help assessments were completed and
the proportion where issues were fully resolved increased from 46% at the
beginning of the year to 58% by the final quarter of the year. The target for
next year is an ambitious 70% for the year as a whole.
young women and young mothers. This befriending service, which is accessed
through the early help arrangements, helps mothers in danger of becoming
isolated and a risk to themselves and their child to regain their confidence.
Support is implemented quickly following assessment, and mothers are
provided with an effective bespoke package from a range of options which
enables them to re-engage positively in the community. In addition, 58 trained
volunteer champions to develop this work are well established across the
county.
partnership working is evident in the MASH. Representatives from the police,
health, adult services and education are based in the MASH; other agencies
such as the probation service, early help, mental health services and trading
standards are also available for additional advice and support.
reflected in the low numbers of enquiries which require no further action. The
total number of referrals received has reduced from 17,836 in 201314 to


the effectiveness of early help arrangements. Inspectors saw examples of good,
well planned early help services that were improving outcomes for children and
families, but the councils information about the impact of these services
remains under-developed. For example, 47.9%, of children are on a child
protection plan due to neglectful parenting; the impact of early help
arrangements on reducing neglect is not yet fully understood. The authority is
working to improve information systems to coincide with a reorganisation of
early help arrangements planned for late 2015.
information can be shared. Consent is recorded clearly on childrens files and in
some child in need cases seen by inspectors enquiries and information-sharing
were suspended until it could be established that the family had provided the
necessary consent.
of contacts. In most cases these are dealt with thoroughly and effectively, with
risks clearly identified by a social worker. A daily meeting of social care
managers, police and education representatives agrees the level of response to
all domestic abuse notifications which have been graded medium or high risk.
Schools are informed in line with Operation Encompass to ensure they are able
to respond to children who have witnessed incidents of domestic abuse.
MASH to assessment teams. They are allocated to a social worker on the same
day in the majority of cases. Cases deemed to be high risk are transferred
immediately for further action.
for a child protection investigation, help is arranged through the child in need
system or the provision of early help. The children in need service is prioritised
well and multiagency communication and planning are effective. Child in need
plans receive regular management oversight and review, which are wellrecorded. Service managers scrutinise these cases after nine months, and
group managers if the plan remains in place for twelve months. Plans are
detailed and include clear information about the help to be offered, the
agencies who will deliver services to the family, timescales and the
improvements needed before the plan can be ended. When childrens plans
come to an end this decision is agreed by the social workers manager and
formally reviewed by other agencies. Decisions are recorded well. The
arrangements for ensuring children receive help at the right level when risks
increase are also clear and operate effectively. This means that childrens cases
are purposefully reviewed by social workers and managers and that when the
help being delivered is not having sufficient impact, alternative plans are put in
place.
rationale for the decisions are not always recorded in sufficient detail. Strategy


discussions seen by inspectors only involved social work managers and the
police. Although decisions were appropriate to the risks identified, they did not
benefit from the information and expertise of other partner agencies. In more
complex areas of work, in particular child sexual exploitation, strategy
discussions were multi-agency and recorded to a much higher standard.
within timescales. However, performance is still too variable across the county,
reducing to 74.5% in one area. Almost all initial child protection conferences
(94.5%) are completed within 15 days of the decision to begin an investigation;
this is a significant improvement on 85.2% in the previous year. Performance in
respect of child protection reviews has also seen sustained improvement, with
an improvement on 97.4% for 201314. However, the police do not routinely
attend initial and review child protection conferences.
least of an adequate standard in all cases seen, and in the majority of cases
were good. In cases which were good, assessments were clear, thorough and
included relevant historical information and an analysis which helped to inform
the childs plan. The council has a My child protection plan document to record
the childs view where the child is old enough to be consulted and this is used
well. The councils performance in working in partnership with agencies and
families to deliver timely and effective child protection arrangements has
improved and is now good.
(ICPC) and fully developed at the first multi-agency core group. Childrens plans
are considered carefully by people who work directly with the family and the
family themselves. In the last three months of 201415, 143 ICPCs were held
and parental participation was high with 299 family members (80.8%)
attending. Parents who spoke to inspectors said they understood the plans and
knew what needed to change to reduce risk. The detailed child protection plans
are reviewed by the social workers manager and practice consultant to ensure
they comply with the general areas specified by the conference. This practice is
working well to improve the quality and effectiveness of plans. The role of the
child protection conference chair has been strengthened. They provide social
workers and managers with information about the quality of social work
practice and routine reminders to ensure that plans do not drift. Child
protection conference reports sampled by inspectors enabled parents and
carers to read them before the conference, and contained appropriate historical
and current detail.
views are sought and well recorded. This is an area of strength. Inspectors saw
examples of good quality, imaginative direct work with children and the
information gained and recorded was used to influence childrens plans.


from an independent provider. However, this is dependent on a request from
the social worker and is not routinely offered to all young people of an
appropriate age who are subject to child protection conferences and other
formal processes.
regularly to establish the level of risk. Core group records are reviewed by
managers and practice consultants and the general standard of these records is
at least adequate. The oversight applied to them means that few childrens
cases are subject to drift. This has helped to reduce year on year the
percentage of child protection plans which have been in place for two or more
years to 2.3% in 201314, which is better than the national average (2.6%).
Performance is continuing to improve.
arrangements. In one child protection review conference parents told the
inspector they felt that their child was better cared for as a result of the
parenting and other support they had received, and that the social worker had
been clear and honest with them about the assessed risks and the actions they
needed to take from the outset.
range of accessible non-statutory specialist services located across the county,
which work in partnership with the council. Domestic abuse services include
individual support, targeted support for children and young people and
structured programmes. Inspectors saw examples of successful engagement
with these services. However, there is limited provision for perpetrators of
domestic violence. A voluntary organisation has seconded six specialist
domestic abuse link workers (DALW) to the councils assessment teams. These
provide guidance to social workers and work directly with families. This is a
recent development and an example of good practice and imaginative
collaboration with partners. However, it is not yet possible to demonstrate its
impact on outcomes for children and families. The authority and the police have
worked together effectively to develop a strategic plan for the commissioning of
domestic abuse services. In June 2014 the police completed a detailed overview
of the services and proposals for future funding in order to preserve and build
on present provision; services will be subject to re-commissioning in late 2015.
children whose parents are affected by substance misuse, 795 whose parents
have mental health problems and 409 children whose parents are affected by
both. The commissioned substance misuse service for children and young
people responds promptly and positively to referrals from childrens social
workers. Its staff engage fully in effective multi-agency planning and joint work.
Services (CAMHS) experience unreasonable delays. The councils own figures


reveal that the waiting time from referral to treatment varies between 22 weeks
and 35 weeks in different parts of the county. A review of the service is
underway, underpinned by a 2 million investment by the clinical
commissioning groups (CCGs) in the county.
and core assessments lead to children being subjected to unnecessary changes
of social worker. While the councils view is that this has been a necessary step
in the development of the service, a single assessment will be introduced later
in 2015.
saw examples of good practice where the full range of childrens and families
needs was being considered. The availability and use of translation services and
work in supporting unaccompanied asylum seeking children to access legal
advice and attend asylum hearing tribunals are good. Specialist domestic
violence projects provide support to same sex couples.
supervised regularly and this is recorded clearly in their personal files with
relevant case work decisions copied onto childrens files. There is some
variability in the format used across the service. However, this does not detract
from the quality of management oversight.
impact in improving the quality of practice, for example through training and
reflective practice sessions. Practice consultants offer multi-agency problem
solving meetings for challenging cases or cases that social workers regard as
stuck, and ensure that research and good practice materials are disseminated
to practitioners. They also have a specific role in the development of less
experienced social workers, including co-working individual childrens cases.
Social workers are very positive about these arrangements and other examples
of commitment to practice such as home working arrangements, mobile
working technology and the recent employment of additional support staff in
social work teams to enable social workers to spend more time working directly
with children and families.
people who go missing. The specialist childrens missing officer receives regular
reports from the police and ensures return interviews are always offered. A
multi-agency meeting is arranged after the third missing episode. Over 70% of
young people take up the offer of a return interview, and 70% of these
interviews take place within 72 hours of the young persons return. The link
between this behaviour and vulnerability to sexual exploitation is acknowledged
and understood. Information gathered is used well to inform multi-agency
operational hot-spot meetings.


good service from the council. The NSCB and child sexual exploitation CrossAuthority Group provide strategic oversight and promote awareness across the
county and Nottingham City, and reports are presented to the Safer
Nottinghamshire Board. Four missing children events organised for 201415
have been held and have been well attended. Staff from all partner agencies
have access to NSCB training including sexual health and e-learning on the risk
of sexual exploitation, which has been promoted well, and inspectors saw
responsive and well-informed work. Social workers make frequent use of the
recently introduced version of the child sexual exploitation risk assessment tool,
which helps them to assess the potential vulnerability to child sexual
exploitation of individual children. Staff have easy access to advice and
consultation from the specialist child sexual exploitation co-ordinator, who is an
experienced child protection conference chair. The threshold for access to a
multi-agency strategy meeting, chaired by the co-ordinator, is deliberately low,
which enables agencies to share information and work together effectively. The
number of child sexual exploitation strategy meetings has increased from 105 in
is as a result of effective awareness-raising and training delivered to 700 staff
face-to face and more than 1,000 participants, including parents, via the NSCB
on-line learning.
invited to strategy meetings unless there are specific reasons for excluding
them. Information from the police, social care, schools and other relevant
agencies is shared about the young person and the known risks and concerns.
They consider the need for disruption activity to deter and prosecute
perpetrators. Young people can be referred to the specialist support worker
employed to work with this specific group or to other agencies for individual
support and direct work. However, information about the impact of this work is
limited and is not subject to analysis to help agencies to plan the future
development of the service.
children at school are strong. Swift action is taken to make sure children are
not missing from education. Managers identify effectively the levels of risk of all
children who are missing from education through tight monitoring processes
which include a weekly evaluation of all absentee cases and daily electronic
monitoring of those children in alternative provision. They are currently tackling
rigorously 38 children they have identified as being most at risk of missing
education. For the rest, 191 have an appropriate education plan in place and
their attendance is being monitored closely and a further 138 children are now
receiving education to meet their needs. Staff monitor proactively the 443
children who are educated at home. Almost all parents have received a visit or
submitted a report about the education and welfare of their children so far this
year.


a school. Managers now place a child in education within 27 days, a significant
improvement on the 94 days it used to take. Leaders are bringing together the
range of available data they use which will give them an even better oversight
of the attendance at schools.
people who become homeless. Attempts are made to help the young person to
return to the care of their family. Where young people cannot return home,
consideration is given to their vulnerability in deciding upon the appropriateness
of foster care. Residential care, non-local authority accommodation and
supported housing are other options available. Bed and breakfast is not used
unless all other options have been exhausted, and only for one or two nights;
the accommodation is risk assessed and the consent of a senior manager is
needed. No young person was placed in bed and breakfast at the time of this
inspection.
is provided by a sufficient number of experienced social workers and managers,
who work from a permanent base and have access to the councils information
systems and childrens files. Practice is aligned with the rest of the service
through regular training, team meetings and development days and information
is passed reliably between this part of the service and other teams. A duty
group manager system ensures that staff have access to senior management
when needed.
Conferences (MARAC) and MARAC notes relevant to known individual children
are copied onto the childs social care file. Multi-Agency Public Protection
Arrangements (MAPPA) meetings are well attended by the councils managers,
which means that there is effective joint working and planning in respect of the
risks considered at these meetings.
volunteering with children are well organised and responsive. Allegations are
handled by a small team comprising an allegations officer, a specialist officer
for dealing with cases from education settings, and dedicated staff to deal with
children missing from home and cases of suspected child sexual exploitation.
Individual cases are managed and planned well, with timely and effective work
carried out to ensure risks to individual children are assessed and addressed, as
well as investigation of the adults concerned.
the number of children and young people known to the council as living in
private fostering arrangements. Currently 14 children and young people are
known to be privately fostered. The response to these arrangements was
variable with some examples seen by inspectors where assessments were


delayed by a number of months. This means some children have been left in
situations where risks have been unassessed.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Services for looked after children have improved since the last inspection and
children and young people now enter care when they need to. Looked after children
and young people benefit from positive relationships with their social workers. Their
wishes and feelings contribute to their individual care plans and broader service
development. Sound social work practice is evident, exemplified by assessments that
are mostly of a good quality.
Families on the edge of care are well supported. When children cannot remain with
their birth families, court processes supported by legal planning meetings and the
Public Law Outline (PLO) are effective and timely.
The vast majority of looked after children and young people live with families in good
quality placements within 20 miles of their homes. Most live in stable placements and
are cared for by skilled foster carers. Children with complex needs are supported by
the work of bespoke Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) for
looked after children.
Looked after children are making good progress at school, attendance is good and
performance at most key stages is improving.
Independent reviewing officers (IROs) demonstrate appropriate rigour and challenge
to care planning. A high proportion of children take part in their reviews and the
increased visiting of children and young people by IROs between statutory reviews is
a commendable development.
Arrangements to track children missing education and those who go missing from
care are robust. Effective multi-agency planning reduces risk for most children and
young people. Children looked after are routinely offered an interview when they
return from a missing episode.
High priority is given to children achieving permanence through adoption.
Recruitment, training and post adoption support are all areas of considerable
strength.
More needs to be done to ensure that looked after childrens health needs are
promptly assessed and met in a timely way.
Services for care leavers have not developed at the same pace as others within the
council and are not yet good. The health needs of care leavers are not fully
addressed and too many pathway plans lack specific actions and timescales. More
needs to be done to secure suitable accommodation for all care leavers.


in the country. Despite this rapid increase, Nottinghamshire continues to have
fewer children in care than its statistical neighbours or the national average.
However numbers are predicted to rise further. The number of looked after
children has risen from 675 in 2011 to 850 as of March 2015. This rise is due to
the effective work of the council and its partners in responding to a history of
poor social work decisions that resulted in children remaining for too long in
abusive family situations.
nominated senior manager reviews their needs and ensures that effective work
takes place with the young person and their family to prevent children from
entering care unnecessarily. Decisions that children should be cared for are
made at an appropriately senior level, supported by legal advice. Such decisions
are evidence based and timely. Inspectors saw no cases where children had
entered care inappropriately. All legal planning meetings are chaired by the
same senior manager to achieve consistency in the application of thresholds.
This also ensures that all other options for children are thoroughly explored at
an early point.
their families on a planned basis. Where this is the case, re-unification is well
planned and underpinned by assessment and the identification of sustained
and appropriate support. This may include theraplay, undertaken by fostering
support workers. In cases seen, decisions for children to return home were
based on realistic assessments of risk and parenting capacity. A small number
of older looked after children and young people have returned home in an
unplanned way. When this happens, social workers are pro-active in providing
ongoing monitoring and support. It is usual for the young persons care
placement to be held open while stability is sought.
made for children and young people to keep them safe. Parents are helped to
understand what they need to do to change and the potential consequences if
they do not. PLO meetings observed by inspectors were conducted well and
were appropriately child centred. Family group conferences are used at times to
consider alternative options for children, but they are not used as a matter of
routine.
good and timely performance. The average length of time it takes to conclude
care proceedings was 27 weeks during 201415; this is an improving figure and
is better than that of statistical neighbours (29 weeks) and the England average
(30 weeks). The local judiciary confirmed that the move towards electronic case
bundles and the improved quality of court reports are helping to improve the


timeliness of court proceedings. This demonstrates good performance in
reducing delay for children. Assessments and reports prepared by social
workers for proceedings are of a high standard overall. All cases benefit from
legal oversight in their preparation.
They know and understand the needs of children and young people well and
demonstrate warmth and commitment to them. There are many examples of
social work interventions with looked after children that are making a positive
difference to improve their outcomes. In the vast majority of cases seen by
inspectors, assessments have led to good quality direct work that helps
children. The majority of assessments seen were of good quality.
mainstream, short-term and long-term therapeutic services. There has recently
been significant investment by the council in securing additional residential
provision through the commissioning of a further 24 placements. This
demonstrates the councils commitment to use residential care alongside its
own provision as a positive choice for some children and young people whose
needs are best met in childrens homes.
from care and associated risks including child sexual exploitation. A crossauthority multi-agency group established in April 2014 pro-actively considers
children and young people who go missing on a regular basis. The group
demonstrates good attendance, discussion and challenge. Agencies work well
together to assess and manage risks posed to children and young people. This
work is effectively co-ordinated by a Children Missing Officer, underpinned by
Safeguarding Board procedures that require multi-agency meetings (MAMs) and
strategy discussions.
the records are mostly of good quality. Despite increased demand, there is
good compliance for completing return interviews; 70% are completed within
performance in relation to annual health checks for 201314 is higher at 90%
than the national average of 88%, the percentage of looked after children
receiving dental checks is 64%, and 61% for immunisations. These figures are
lower than the national averages, which are 84% and 87% respectively.
However, the current data show completion rates stand at 52%. This poor
performance represents a missed opportunity to identify and respond to the
emotional needs of looked after children and young people through targeted
service provision. The council is aware that the meeting of health needs of the


looked after children population remains a stubborn obstacle that was also
identified in previous inspections. Accordingly, a multi-agency action plan has
been devised to drive up performance in this area. It is too early to measure
impact and improved outcomes.
the CAMHS Looked After Children and Adoption Team. The team is currently
working with 319 open cases. Dedicated professionals provide timely support to
staff and carers through both consultations and assessment. Based on the most
recent January 2015 to April 2015 data the average waiting time for the initial
CAMHS consultation with a social worker is 5 weeks. Following the initial
CAMHS consultation, young people or foster carers are generally seen within
two weeks for treatment or follow up.
services to help them reduce risks. Effective action is taken to identify and
tackle risks associated with offending. There is a good overview of all those in
care who are known to the youth offending service, ensuring that suitable
support and diversionary activities are in place for each individual young
person. This contributes to offending rates of 11%, which are lower than
national averages.
looked after children in the community it serves. Staff plan and monitor looked
after children's progress and emotional development carefully, which they
record well in personal education plans (PEPs). They are working particularly
effectively with leaders and managers in schools to ensure that an increasing
number of these children make good progress and achieve. They have a good
grip on attendance at schools county-wide. Attendance rates, which have
improved over the last few years, were in line with national rates in 2013 and
have improved again in 2014/15. Absence rates for looked after children have
decreased over the last few years, despite increasing numbers of looked after
children. For example, in 2012/13 the overall absence rate was 4.4%; a year
later it was 3.7%.
primary schools making at least the expected progress in reading and
mathematics between Key Stages 1 and 2 has significantly improved from 71%
to 86% over the last few years. In 2013/14 the attainment of looked after
children in reading and mathematics was above average compared to their
peers nationally at Key Stages 1 and 2. The proportion that attained well at Key
Stage 1 in reading and mathematics was 76%. The proportion that attained
well at Key Stage 2 in reading was 69% and in mathematics 63%. The
attainment gaps in mathematics and reading between looked after children and
all children are reducing. About 67% attain well in their writing at Key Stage 1
and the proportion that make the expected progress is improving, but
attainment is below the average for similar children nationally at Key Stage 2.


of the virtual school use their self-evaluation process well to identify and take
resolute action to tackle poorer performance. This, for example, has meant that
they are fully aware of the need to improve progress and achievement further,
particularly for looked after children at secondary schools between Key Stages 2
and 4. A small proportion of all looked after children in the council take
examinations at Key Stage 4. The proportion gaining five GCSEs including
English and mathematics is increasing and above the average of their peers
nationally, although it is still too low.
particularly effective initiative using the pupil premium to raise standards in
looked after childrens English skills has captured the imagination of the
children, carers and teachers. It has helped children who have significant
barriers to learning to create, for example, inventive narratives to a sequence of
photographs they have taken. The result of unlocking these childrens thirst to
read and write, with support from carers and teachers, is the improvement they
are making in their attainment and the confidence they gain from the pieces of
work they complete. Since the project started, data held by the council show 55
out of 56 children at different key stages have made the expected progress in
developing their English skills and 35% have made exceedingly good progress.
and thorough planning with partners ensures the educational and emotional
needs of looked after children are met, including for those where a range of
alternative provision is the right choice. The council monitors carefully the very
small minority (4%) of children who attend inadequate schools to ensure that
their needs continue to be met. Managers implement a good range of training
events and information sharing with schools on the dangers of, for example,
cyber bullying, self-harm, and radicalisation. They monitor closely and take
action where incidents arise in schools; further work is required to understand
fully the effectiveness of their work.
education or training in employment between ages 16-18. However, managers
do not analyse this enough or set targets to increase it further. The number of
looked after children following apprenticeships or work-based learning is
increasing but is still too low. The audits of personal education plans focus well
on childrens progress and attainment but are less rigorous in assessing the
appropriateness of the young persons next steps at the end of Key Stage 4.
carers have access to a broad range of social and leisure activities. The
achievements of looked after children are celebrated annually.
families. The percentage of children placed with in-house carers or with kinship


carers is 64%. Effective work has been undertaken in the last year to reduce
the number of children placed in out-of-county residential provision. At the time
of inspection three young people had been successfully moved to foster
families. The annual At a distance audit in September 2014 highlighted good
quality placements being achieved, good identification and management of
children at risk of child sexual exploitation, and children making good use of the
local community and leisure facilities. Nottinghamshire has a policy of only
placing children in good or outstanding provision, so the vast majority of
children and young people live in provision that is at least good. These
children and young people are well matched, their needs are met and in the
majority of cases seen, outcomes are improving.
following evaluation of the range of current services. Targeted recruitment and
significant additional financial investment have increased in-house fostering
sufficiency, reducing expenditure on external provision. All assessments are
concluded within eight months. The authority approved 66 foster households in
households. Nottinghamshire is one of the countrys top ten performing councils
in respect of the number of foster placements each foster household provides,
quality of social work assessments; currently about 90% are judged by the
panel to be of high quality. Panel members have annual appraisals and
performance plans, to ensure that their skills continue to develop.
Guardianship Order (SGO) is made, including access to support services, for
example theraplay. Following a steady increase in SGOs, numbers are
stabilising, with 80 SGOs being granted in 2013-14 and 62 in 2014-15. It is
common practice for the council to consider applying for a Supervision Order
alongside SGOs and Child Arrangements Orders. This practice ensures ongoing
social work support to children, young people, families and carers. These
children and young people become subject to child in need planning that is
reviewed by child protection coordinators. Support plans identify support
arrangements for these children. Applications to foster to adopt have increased
and there were two applications in progress at the time of the inspection.
their supervising social workers. Such support extends to round-the-clock
access to a bespoke fostering helpline. A range of training is in place for foster
carers and is delivered both online and through face-to-face workshops and
training events. Foster carer training involves delivery by fostered young
people, other foster carers, and internal and external training providers. The
training delivered by CAMHS in relation to methods of intervention and
attachment disorder is reported by foster carers to be particularly helpful.


quality assessments of need. They are regularly re-assessed by social workers
to reflect the changing needs of children, to ensure they are met. The majority
of care plans consider the diverse needs of children and young people well.
appropriate. Permanence is considered for all children at the second statutory
review. Tracking meetings convened every six weeks are attended by the
Court, Permanency and Adoption teams. These meetings discuss all aspects of
permanence planning, for example assessing foster carers as adopters and
placing children with older siblings who have been adopted. Plans for
permanence other than through adoption for children and young people under
fifteen years, are subject to scrutiny by the Permanence Panel.
their life history through purposeful direct work. The council has been effective
in placing children with their brothers and sisters when it has been assessed to
be in their best interests.
children placed by Nottinghamshire have experienced three or more placement
moves within a year, compared with 11% nationally. Over 72% of looked after
children have been in the same placement for two or more years, exceeding
the national average of 67%.
completed by independent reviewing officers (IROs) between April 2014 and
March 2015 was 2,263; 90.5% were completed within timescales in the year to
March 2015. Of the 2,382 children who had a looked after review during 2014
people are recorded as having attended reviews. Of the remainder, 47.3% are
recorded as having their views made known to the review. Throughout the
year, there were only 62 occasions when it was recorded that a child's views
had not been known and able to inform the review. Where views are not
evidenced at the review, the IROs subsequently endeavour to gain the views of
the young person.
from the regular reviews provide a good overview of progress made and action
needed, which ensures that drift is avoided in most cases. An effective
escalation process is in place and is used well to help inform service
development and social work practice.
in care council called No Labels. This is well structured, with three groups
comprising different age bands of young people from diverse backgrounds. The
young people are rightly proud of the wide range and high quality of materials
that they have produced to inform others of what they do, including the Pledge.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
of looked after children annually over the last three years. Between 2011-14,
proportionately greater than in other councils. Council figures show that in
compares with 51 and 42 respectively in 2011-12.
improve the range of appropriate permanence options for all looked after
children who need them. The numbers of Special Guardianship Orders (SGOs)
have also increased from 55 in the two year period 2011-13 to 134 during
More looked after children are being placed with their extended family or
friends under fostering regulations, 31 children are permanently placed and 35
are looked after by their family or friends subject to temporary approval as
foster carers. The Court, Permanence and Adoption teams work closely
together to commence parallel planning at the earliest stage of care
proceedings.
of its black and minority ethnic looked after children, which is in proportion to
their representation in the looked after population. This indicator also compares
favourably with similar councils. A slightly higher number of older children,
aged 5 to 11 years, are adopted in the county than in other authorities. In
and 11 years. The council also has a strong record in adoptions of brothers and
sisters. Of 67 children adopted between April to December 2014, 60% were
part of a sibling group. In 201314, 15 family groups of brothers and sisters
were placed together, and none was separated, which is commendable. This
information indicates that Nottinghamshire is highly effective in achieving
adoption for children who are typically more difficult to place. This is in addition
to the increased range of other permanent outcomes secured for their looked
after children.
days from the point they entered care during 201114. This is better than the
national average of 628 days, although below the Department for Education
target. The average time in 2014 was shorter than the previous year. However,
the council took significantly longer, at 254 days, during the period 20112014
to match children with adopters from the point court authority was obtained
than other councils. Over the last two years the number of days has increased,


indicating that an improving trend is not yet evident. In the last year, the
average time from placement order to matching was 324 days.
disabilities, behavioural difficulties such as attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder, autism, and older children. Cases sampled during the inspection
indicated that extensive family finding was undertaken over a protracted time
period, of two to three years in some cases. While the reasons for delays in
family finding are recognised, this does leave some children in uncertain
situations for too long, despite the councils tenacity in ongoing family finding
efforts.
are currently 56 approved adopters awaiting a match, with 27 children waiting.
This demonstrates efficient sufficiency planning in the recruitment of adopters.
There are, on average, six new enquiries, six approvals and six children placed
each month.
approvals and matches to be scrutinised without delay. The panels have a
diverse membership with longstanding independent chairs. Panel members
receive regular training and annual appraisals. Panels are efficiently
administered and managed with extensive minutes chronicling careful probing
and analysis of social work assessments. Placement breakdowns are extremely
low in number, indicating that panel quality assurance is an important
component in planning careful, enduring matches.
Seven of these did not have a Placement Order, so home finding activities were
duly limited. Potential links had been identified for 27 children, ranging from
early phases of report exchange, through to advanced preparations for panel.
Five children had a panel date booked during the month the inspection was
held. One child was unborn, with discussions occurring about a foster-to-adopt
placement.
complete the large majority of both stages of the assessment process within
timescales. On average Stage 1 of the assessment process is completed in less
than two months at 7.1 weeks and Stage 2 marginally outside of the prescribed
four months target at an average of 127 days. Where assessments take longer,
there are clear reasons, such as adopters taking time out to reflect and
contemplate further on their motivation, in some cases seeking counselling to
consider unresolved issues emerging from their personal histories.
all groups and seminars provided. Additional seminars are offered, for example,
on loss, identity and discrimination, play and therapeutic parenting and contact
and adoption. Thorough financial assessments are undertaken by two dedicated


welfare rights specialists to ensure all benefits and tax credits are understood
and used.
thorough and rigorous. PARs seen during the inspection featured wellconsidered reflection and analysis of adult profiles and histories with evidence
of pertinent challenge and probing by both authors and panel members.
Twenty five adopters seen during the inspection spoke highly of the support,
professionalism and skill of social workers during their assessments. Childrens
family histories and individual profiles were skilfully reported in CPRs, providing
prospective adopters and panel members with rich content on which to
consider matches. Panel Chairs reported that the large majority of social work
reports are of a good quality.
Midlands consortium, Adoption Register, Adoption Link and local profiling and
activity days. All children waiting are reviewed each month. Home finding files
demonstrate thorough, imaginative and interesting profiles of children.
Importance is paid to producing high quality, sensitive and well-illustrated life
story books. Direct work undertaken with children in the preparation phase by
their social workers is skilled and of a consistently high quality. Adopter profiles
are prepared and disseminated during the second stage of their PAR
assessments to minimize delay and increase the volume of potential matches.
Council figures show that the service is currently engaging with 115 adults and
counselling service. An online resource bank provides links to a wide range of
articles, resources and books for adopters. An informative range of seminars
and workshops is offered each year for adopters to both meet and learn about
important themes such as the impact of foetal alcohol syndrome.
psychotherapy to help adopters understand attachment and develop strong
attachments with their children, particularly in the earlier phases of adoption.
Some adopted children are supported by sessional workers who undertake
regular confidence building activities with them. Nottinghamshires Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Service (CAMHS) provides a dedicated, specialist
service for looked after and adopted children. CAMHS also provide consultations
to social workers and adopters. There are 319 open cases in CAMHS of looked
after and adopted children. The average duration of treatment programmes is
support at any stage of childhood, receiving consistent, prompt responses. The
advice and support received about issues concerning contact with birth family


members, arising both in the early post placement phase through to their
childrens teenage and early adult years.
premium is used for children with additional educational needs to provide
further support in schools. Adopters are offered support when their children
approach secondary school transfer, to assist them through the transition
period.
considered have had plans changed; this illustrates an improving trend from
previous years. Cases seen by inspectors show that reasons for changed plans
were predominantly justifiable including examples where foster carers had
formed enduring attachments and wished to foster the children permanently.
The children concerned expressed clear wishes not to be moved. A further
example featured a birth mother who successfully applied for revocation of a
placement order, having separated from a partner who was the primary source
of safeguarding concerns, and the child returned to her care under a
supervision order.
there are four such placements currently. Clear guidance is available to both
adopters and potential adopters. Recent fostering-to-adopt cases involve babies
where the birth mothers older children have been removed, and younger
children in proceedings whose older siblings are already members of an
adoptive family. Concurrent planning occurs during care proceedings where the
council position is not to consider rehabilitation but the court has not yet
confirmed an adoption plan. Liaison is ongoing with the Family Proceedings
Court and the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service to
further their understanding and support of the scheme. The programme is
targeted at adopters with the level of emotional resilience necessary to manage
uncertainty and potential loss.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
children and young people, as services for safeguarding have received a higher
priority. Only recently have care leavers been included in a looked after children
and care leavers strategy, and this indicates that there has been a lack of
attention to their needs. An increasing population of looked after children and
care leavers means improved planning and a wider range of resources need to
be in place to meet the demands of young people leaving care.


who are passionate about their work and know the care leavers well. The
council reports that they are in touch with 86% of care leavers. Case records
show that personal advisers make efforts to locate those not in contact. All care
leavers who spoke to inspectors talked of the valued relationship they have
with their personal advisers. They all said they feel safe where they live and in
the knowledge that their personal adviser is available and there to help. Care
leavers talked about their personal advisers being only a phone call away and
amazing.
life choices. Examples seen included personal advisers working with a care
leaver to consider how his behaviour, though innocent, could be construed as
threatening to others he lived with. In another case involving risks of domestic
abuse, a personal adviser worked with a young person and other agencies to
develop a safety strategy. All pathway plans include details and contact
numbers of agencies who can offer support, and care leaving teams have a
range of helpful leaflets and information for care leavers.
book and DVD. Evidence was seen of personal advisers working with young
people on budgeting, relationships, use of public transport and spending of the
home establishment grant. Some personal advisers are trained in a scheme to
provide young people with condoms and the Family Nurse Partnership has
worked with care leavers who are pregnant or parents to assist with parenting
skills. Care leavers have talked of the confidence they have gained from
working with personal advisers who have assisted them to prepare for job
interviews. The care leaving service has provided financial support to care
leavers for a wide range of needs including higher education, maintaining
contact with family and friends and help with the costs of obtaining a heavy
goods vehicle licence.
leavers. The Childrens Integrated Commissioning Hub, formed in July 2014,
has an action plan to undertake an audit of health needs including substance
misuse and teenage pregnancy but this work has not been completed to date.
This means that the council is unaware of care leavers health needs, the
resources that are needed and where these should be targeted.
a letter or health passport. A new health information pack is being piloted for
young people approaching their 18th birthday. However, the current group of
care leavers do not have this information and there are no plans to ensure that
it is made available to them. This means that they will not know their full health
histories when seeking treatment in the future.
services. The Looked After Children Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service,


which provides valuable consultation and direct work for looked after children,
ceases when they reach the age of 18. Where emotional and mental health
needs are recognised by personal advisers they have few options to support
care leavers other than suggesting a GP referral. The council assists with
financial support for therapeutic help in some cases but this does not meet the
needs of the majority. Where care leavers with disabilities have met thresholds
for adult services, inspectors saw examples of good transition planning. Social
workers have been allocated, along with psychology services and support
packages, including respite.
Plans describe care leavers histories and circumstances well, with their views
clearly expressed, yet the actions recorded are not sufficiently clear. Personal
advisers encourage and support care leavers to take initiative and responsibility
for themselves but do not set out what they will do to help them. Timescales
are often set as the next review date, which means that the plan is not a
working document. In some cases seen there was a lack of follow-up work
described in case notes and it was not possible to see if important areas such
as mental health needs were being addressed.
scrutiny and challenge. Managers use a tracking system to ensure that plans
are completed within timescales. There are 347 open cases in the care leaving
service of which 38 are still open to the looked after childrens teams as the
young person is aged between 17.5 years and 18 years. The councils tracking
system showed that 33 plans (10.6%) out of 309 had not been reviewed within
timescales, though there was some uncertainty about this figure, which
suggests that management information is not always reliable.
accommodation needs of care leavers to provide choice and emergency
provision. If they become homeless, care leavers have to apply to district
councils as homeless, consider private rented accommodation or rely on family
or friends. The council has developed a commissioning strategy Supporting
Young People (16-21) to Live Independently. This is due to be implemented in
September 2015 and aims to provide services for homeless young people and
care leavers, including emergency provision.
accommodation, which is higher than statistical neighbours at 74% and the
England average of 78% as at 31 March 2014. The council has 199 units of
accommodation, offering varying levels of support. There are specialised units
in three districts catering for teenagers who are pregnant or parents, and a 12
bedded unit is available for care leavers who are disabled, with 24 hour
support. Bed and breakfast accommodation is used rarely and only as a last
resort and for a limited period. Of 70 houses in multi-occupation, 64 are
deemed suitable and risk assessments are completed prior to a young person
moving in. There has been sensitive work undertaken with asylum seekers


about their accommodation preferences. Some groups of asylum seekers
choose to share accommodation, which provides a good support network.
figure of 31. These arrangements are made with both Nottinghamshires and
independent agency foster carers. This demonstrates the councils commitment
to the stability of placements for care leavers. One asylum seeker spoke about
his foster carers being like his own family, supporting his cultural needs with
the purchase of halal meat and attending the mosque, and could not thank
them enough.
large national charity in January 2015 and noted a lack of understanding of
health needs and challenges in the provision of accommodation. It also
recognised the limited involvement of the Corporate Parenting Sub-Committee
and the subsequent lack of drive from this group to work with partners to
ensure improvements are made. The lack of strategic oversight is also reflected
in the fact that the council does not hold management information on care
leavers who are missing, at risk of sexual exploitation, substance misusers or
offenders. Individual cases are known and worked on but there is a lack of
understanding of the needs of the group as a whole and how resources should
be targeted. The council is now responding to the findings from this external
audit. It has strengthened the corporate parenting panel with additional
personnel to provide greater rigour and challenge, to ensure that services
improve at a much faster rate. It is too early to see the impact of this.
training or employment. This is slightly better than statistical neighbours at
education, training or employment has been increasing in the last few years
and it is still too high. Robust plans are in place and include increasing the
number of apprenticeship courses available.
employment. This is above statistical neighbours at 40% and the England
average of 45%. Of these, five (3%) went on to higher education, which is
below comparators at 6%, 55 went on to further education and 55 went into
training or employment. While this is better than the average for councils
nationally, and the proportion has been increasing in the last few years, it is still
too low.
access learning. The council was awarded the Care2Work quality mark in 2015
for work in supporting young people with education, employment and training.
Care leavers cite their educational experiences in vocational education and the
development of English and mathematics as being important stepping stones to
them moving forward in their lives. Targets in plans seen by inspectors have
not been sufficiently clear and several care leavers have moved between


different education and career pathways. Not enough are sufficiently well
advised about the right future learning opportunities at the point of leaving
care.
information along with opportunities to mix with staff and peers. Care leavers
who spoke to inspectors were positive about such events, which have recently
focused on domestic violence, refugee services and financial support.
After Children and Young People, which shows that it is not a meaningful
document for them. Some care leavers have been involved in staff interviews
and service development but not all care leavers are engaged with the
development of the service. Staff recognise this as an area for development
and a newsletter for care leavers is being produced. There is a range of
documents available to care leavers covering their entitlements, employment,
financial support and complaints. These are provided when care leavers need
information. Care leavers are aware of how to complain and details are set out
in pathway plans.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Since its transformation programme began in May 2011, the council has taken
authoritative action to invest in and redesign services for children and young people.
This has led to services being judged as good at this inspection, with the exception
of the care leaving service which has been found to require improvement. This
means that the most vulnerable children and young people in Nottinghamshire are
likely to receive the help they need and are safer as a result.
Effective governance arrangements are in place. Political and professional leaders are
clear about their roles and responsibilities, and encourage robust challenge and
oversight to support improvement in most aspects of service provision. Where
services are not as strong, for example services for care leavers and children living in
private fostering arrangements, plans are now in place to improve practice. A recent
external review of the care leaving service, conducted by a large national charity in
January 2015, identified many of the shortfalls highlighted in this inspection. Senior
leaders accept they need to continue to focus on making improvements to this
service. They recognise there is more to do to ensure that practice is consistently
good across all services.
Clear lines of accountability and a strong culture of performance management have
led to improved practice and experiences for children and young people and their
families. Senior leaders and elected members are visible and active in quality
assurance activity, including audit and shadowing practitioners. Management
oversight of practice is embedded and social workers receive regular supervision. A
strong focus on listening to practitioners about the pressures they face in their day to
day work has led to initiatives to improve their working environment and contributes
to high morale.
Until recently the corporate parenting panel had not had sufficient oversight of
services for care leavers, but changes have been made to ensure greater scrutiny
and impact as services develop. Good commissioning arrangements are in place,
with, for example, renewed focus on ensuring child mental health services are
equipped to meet the growing demand for complex and multiple health care needs.
Effective workforce planning has been underpinned by improvements to the working
environment, the introduction of practice consultants, enhanced business support
and better caseload management.


Inspection findings
significant weaknesses in service delivery, and the inspection of safeguarding
and arrangements for looked after children in March 2010, which found overall
effectiveness for safeguarding to be inadequate, swift and decisive action was
taken by the council to tackle the deficits. An unannounced inspection in
February 2011 concluded that there had been considerable progress made,
with a further inspection in September 2011 finding services to be adequate. A
stable and consistent senior leadership team has provided vision and drive to
improving services and outcomes for children and young people. Investment of
the social work establishment.
of Childrens Services and elected members, have detailed knowledge and
understanding of the experiences of children and young people in
Nottinghamshire. This is underpinned by regular reviews of data and a quality
assurance process that involves senior managers and elected members in
auditing, shadowing practitioners and visiting services.
and are supported by regular meetings which include the Chairman of the
Children and Young Peoples Committee, the childrens social care lead member
and the principal social worker. This is an effective forum for challenge and
debate, informed by elected members direct knowledge of services and the
principal social workers dialogue with frontline practitioners.
sub-group of the Health and Wellbeing Board. The board maintains a focus on
childrens issues, with regular agenda items relating to children and young
people.
sexual exploitation. A strategy involving partners within the council and
neighbouring authorities underpins this work. Extensive awareness training has
been completed for staff including bespoke events for elected members, head
teachers and school governors.
who go missing and the increased risk of sexual exploitation. Systems are in
place where a young person is reported absent or missing to ensure
vulnerability to sexual exploitation is considered in assessing the risk they may
face. The appointment of a dedicated missing co-ordinator by the council
provides a point of contact for external agencies, advice to social workers and is
key in identifying patterns and trends. However, the council does not gather
and use management information effectively enough with regard to care


leavers who are missing or at risk of sexual exploitation, to enable them to
have a better understanding of their needs.
younger children in years four and five and will recognise other vulnerabilities
such as risks of radicalisation.
and protection or need to be looked after are receiving the help they need.
Good management oversight is embedded at team manager level. Social
workers feel supported by regular supervision that assists in progressing plans
and improving outcomes for children and young people. One recently appointed
team manager described training on reflective supervision as having improved
her practice. However, records of supervision seen by inspectors did not always
evidence this. Practice consultants based in social work teams provide research
and learning from local and national serious case reviews in addition to
providing support to individual workers through mentoring or co-working. Their
role is highly valued by practitioners.
strategy on recruiting newly qualified social workers. Social workers in their first
year of practice benefit from the support of a mentor as well as access to
practice consultants and their own line manager. Newly qualified social workers
spoken to by inspectors were positive about the support they receive. Reliance
on agency staff is reducing; current rates at 17%, with an average stay of 284
days, show stability within the agency workforce. Agency staff are used
proactively, sometimes in a supernumerary capacity, for example to increase
the balance of experienced staff where there is a high number of newly
qualified social workers in a team. This ensures an appropriate balance of
experience while new practitioners develop their skills and knowledge. As a
result of this strategy, 100 newly qualified social workers have moved on to
experienced worker status over the last four years.
protection conference co-ordinators and independent reviewing officers (IROs)
consider their role in relation to challenge is acknowledged, welcomed and
promoted by senior leaders. Senior managers are accessible and responsive.
Thoughtful attention has been given to improving the environment for
practitioners. An annual social work health check carried out by the council, a
staff survey, staff forums, visits to services and shadowing opportunities are all
used by leaders and managers to understand the pressures staff experience.
Mobile working, personal safety alarms and additional business support are all
initiatives introduced in response to feedback from staff. Social workers value
this support and the councils investment in their working environment.
workers, child protection conference co-ordinators and IROs. This investment
has supported good performance, for example with 99.6% of children subject


to child protection plans having their reviews held in a timely way in 201415.
IRO caseloads reduced from around 120 two years ago to current caseloads in
the low seventies. This has had a direct impact on the ability of IROs to spend
time with children and young people. A caseload weighting system is in place
and caseloads in social work teams vary. Caseloads seen by inspectors in the
court teams ranged between 10 and 12. In assessment and district child
protection teams they are higher, with the highest caseload seen by inspectors
being 26. All of the social workers spoken to by inspectors described their
caseloads as manageable. There was no unallocated work.
managers have access to a daily data dashboard which supports them in
monitoring the timely completion of work, case load numbers and visits to
children in timescales, and enables them to spot potential risks and provide
additional support to teams where appropriate.
developed by senior managers to focus on quality of practice rather than
compliance. A culture of auditing has been established with 5% of child in need
cases and 5% of child protection cases audited each quarter. Audits are
conducted by senior managers and elected members as well as team
managers. Improvements in practice have resulted, for example, in the quality
of child protection plans graded good or outstanding. In the last three months
of 201314, 35% of 109 child protection cases audited received a good or
better grade, based upon assessed and analysed needs and reflecting the views
of children, young people, parents and carers. In the same three months of
plans were graded good or better for their quality. External audits are
commissioned to support improvement and validate the quality and rigour of
the internal audit process. The councils own audit findings from the cases
selected as part of the inspection were generally consistent with the overall
findings of inspectors.
the quality of services to care leavers. Plans are in place to increase the
effectiveness of this service but these were not fully embedded in practice at
the time of this inspection. The response by the council to a peer evaluation of
its leaving care service, conducted by a large national charity in January 2015,
has been uncharacteristically slow for a senior leadership team that has shown
such tenacity in all other areas of service delivery.
has improved the timeliness of proceedings to 27 weeks, reducing delay in
achieving permanence for children and young people.
Quality Screening inspection by HMI Probation of Youth Offending work in
Nottinghamshire in May 2015 found that work to reduce re-offending, to


protect the public, children and young people, and to ensure sentences are
served was of a good quality. The inspection found the performance of the
Youth Justice Service to be very creditable.
arrangements in Nottinghamshire by Her Majestys Inspectorate of
Constabulary (HMIC) found some areas of weakness similar to those identified
during this inspection; in particular, the police attendance at and contribution to
initial child protection conferences, information sharing and children not being
seen and spoken to when responding to domestic violence referrals. Since the
inspection the council both through the senior leadership team, elected
members and the Local Safeguarding Children Board have been engaging in
conversation with senior officers in the police force to support improvement in
these areas. An action plan and an action log are used to update members on
the progress made.
assessment (JSNA) which gives appropriate attention to children and young
peoples requirements. Commissioning arrangements are responsive to need
and emerging issues. Arrangements are aligned with the sufficiency strategy
and the council has been successful in increasing the pool of in-house foster
carers. A contract to provide a block purchase of 24 beds was awarded to two
external providers in April 2015. This will provide increased opportunities for
children and young people to remain in or return to Nottinghamshire when it is
their best interests to do so. It is intended to reduce the overall average cost of
residential care while sustaining quality.
review of a number of services including health services for children and young
people with complex or multiple health needs and CAMHS. A 2million pound
investment has been secured from the clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) to
redesign and improve CAMHS. This will increase capacity and include a crisis
intervention team which is not available currently. The Integrated Children and
Young People Healthcare Programme will streamline health services for children
and young people, bringing together a range of 15 services. The contract is
currently out to tender and is expected to take effect in April 2016.
effective in monitoring and improving the health care needs of looked after
children. It has also not provided sufficient scrutiny with regard to the care
leaving service. The panel has recently been expanded to include an IRO and
team manager from the care leaving service to ensure greater scrutiny and
impact in driving forward the improvements required.
services in Nottinghamshire. Their views and life experiences are used well.
They are routinely incorporated into themed audits, with practice consultants
visiting children and young people to gather their views. In addition to


contributing to the audit process, children are given the opportunity to send a
Message in a Bottle to the head of service. All of the children receive a
personal response to their messages.
and vibrant group engaged in a range of activities, consultations and
campaigns. They have produced an anti-bullying DVD and contributed to the
design of the Integrated Community Children and Young Peoples Healthcare
Programme. Currently the Young Pioneers are working on a campaign on
improving public transport for young disabled people. The Children in Care
Council, No Labels, is dynamic and is involved in a range of activities and
consultations that have had a direct impact on services such as the standard of
childrens homes and helping to train foster carers so that they are better
prepared and understand the needs of looked after children.
which is evidence based. The Knowledge Transfer partnership established with
Nottingham Trent University identified the Family Nurse Partnership as an
effective parenting programme. Funding from the council and NHS England was
used to extend the scheme by a further 200 places. A literature review of the
effectiveness of theoretical approaches to working with children and families is
underpinning the development of the single assessment in Nottinghamshire and
the evidenced based multi-modality literacy project has had a direct and
striking impact on looked after childrens achievement in reading and writing.
Inspectors saw evidence of learning from serious case reviews, for example
through individual discussion with social workers, and in innovations such as
the Think Family model used by GPs in Bassetlaw. This entails weekly meetings
to share information and consider risk in relation to vulnerable children whose
parents are involved with adult services.
complaints. Most complaints are resolved quickly with only nine (3.3%) of 266
complaints received in 201415 progressing beyond stage one. Themes are
identified at quarterly meetings; this has led to the revision of processes and
procedures such as the issuing of clearer guidance on procedures to manage
induced or fabricated illness, which has had a positive impact on practice.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and Board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.

Executive summary
The Nottinghamshire Safeguarding Children Board (NSCB) is effectively chaired and
well managed and has enabled positive co-operative relationships between partner
agencies. It fulfils all of its statutory responsibilities and facilitates strong multiagency co-operation.
Partners hold each other to account well and keep safeguarding at the centre of the
work of the Board. Escalation processes are used effectively when necessary. There
is a clear, succinct business plan, updated as emerging priorities arise, which holds
board members to account, and a Learning and Development Framework that
supports the agreed expectations of partners.
The Board has a strong multi-agency audit process and ensures improvement is
monitored through repeat audit in priority areas. There is a strong learning and
development programme linked to national and local issues, and learning from
serious case reviews is embedded in this programme.
The Board ensures that childrens experiences are at the centre of its work, including
children placed away from the council, and children from other councils placed in
Nottinghamshire.
The Board is aware of areas in which it needs to develop, for example with regard to
influencing involvement in multi-agency strategy discussions, updating the
Communication and Engagement Strategy, and ensuring the effectiveness of private
fostering arrangements. The current data set primarily focuses on childrens social
care, which means that data and information on safeguarding by other agencies are
not fully considered.


Recommendations
relevant agencies, such as the police in child protection conferences.
(Paragraph 145)
practitioner awareness of the work of the Board. (Paragraph 154)
privately fostered. (Paragraph 164)
performance of partner agencies. (Paragraph 155)

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
statutory and regulatory responsibilities, assisted by a regularly updated selfassessment tool. Board members are of sufficient seniority within their own
organisation to have influence and effect change.
and the Executive group is chaired by the Boards vice chair. Sub-groups are
effective and an escalation process is in operation for any issues that cannot be
resolved within these groups.
partners as having a bit of life to it. It offers a safe environment to hold
partners to account and challenge as necessary. Partners who spoke to
inspectors felt that the structure and grip of the Board meant that the
safeguarding focus stayed strong in Nottinghamshire regardless of any external
organisational changes. It was described as a Board that has matured and
where members can have difficult conversations; it was defined as owning the
safeguarding agenda across the partnership. Recent challenging conversations
at a strategic level have included the lack of police attendance at child
protection conferences and the heath care needs of looked after children.
Partner agencies spoken with described the Board as giving equal consideration
and respect to all partners while remaining clearly focused on the overall
priorities of the work of the Board. The Board has two lay members who
participate in site visits to frontline services along with other Board members.
This has included meeting directly with young people and shadowing front line
practitioners. The role of the lay members is clear and they offer a challenging
voice to the Board on behalf of children and the public.


agencies across social care, education and health, with the police chairing the
child sexual exploitation cross-agency sub-group. This assists in providing a
multi-agency perspective across the range of Board functions. The Board is
financially well managed, with long-established multi-agency funding
arrangements.
progress and the evidence shows that this has been fulfilled. An independent
review of the Board in 2013 recognised the continued progress. The Board has
continued to make significant progress while also identifying areas for further
improvement. Recent specific improvements include an increased focus on early
help, a higher profile for safeguarding in education and the appointment to
vacant posts of the training coordinator in 2014 and a development manager
(child deaths) in February 2015.
each other to account. Recent discussions at the full board have included the
use of adult wards for the treatment of young people with mental health issues,
and children detained in police cells under section 136 of the Mental Health Act
timescales for review.
communication networks including the Missing Childrens group, the Think
Family group, the health forum, the safeguarding and education forum, the
cross-authority group looking at female genital mutilation and the Young
Peoples Board. The Board worked with the Young Peoples Board to
commission a film to reduce the number of road traffic accidents. This was
disseminated across the partnership, including schools, and lesson plans are
being developed. The film was also shown at the first national Child Death
Overview Panel Conference in December 2014.
Trust, Nottinghamshires Adults Safeguarding Board and Nottingham City
Safeguarding Children Board. This has assisted on issues such as tackling child
sexual exploitation, and a cross-authority multi-agency child sexual exploitation
strategy and work plan for 201516 support this. The Chair of the safeguarding
board sits on the Childrens Trust, and leads two priority areas of the Children
and Young Peoples Plan, one of which is child sexual exploitation. The current
multi-agency audit focusing on mental health, domestic abuse and substance
misuse is an effective example of a joint piece of work across the Adults and
Childrens Boards within Nottinghamshire.
between the council Chief Executive, the Director of Childrens Services and the
Chair of the Board. This is supported by regular minuted meetings between the
Chief Executive, the Chair, the Principal Social Worker and elected members.


The Chair meets quarterly with the Director of Childrens Services prior to a
main Board meeting to discuss the agenda, performance and scrutiny issues.
The Chief Executive takes priority issues from the Board to broader areas of
influence and a piece of work has recently been commissioned on taxi licensing
and fast food outlets as part of the child sexual exploitation action plan.
updated to include emerging priorities such as reviewing thresholds and
refreshing inter-agency guidance in relation to neglect, and scrutiny of CAMHS
provision including the implementation of a review of CAMHS. Both actions are
led by the Chair of the safeguarding board with a neglect threshold exercise
arranged for June 2015 and a report on progress regarding CAMHS being
presented to the Board in September 2015.
associated action plan is used to monitor and evaluate progress against priority
areas of work using a colour coded system. All but one of the actions are on
target. The only area rated red, where a target has not been met, relates to the
need to update the Communication and Engagement Strategy, to ensure that
frontline practitioners are increasingly aware of the impact of the board.
set. Performance information is combined with qualitative analysis to help to
understand the experiences of children and young people. However,
information is primarily focused on childrens social care; data and information
from other agencies, such as the use of police powers of protection, are not
currently considered.
sub-group. This is an area of strength. Areas of practice requiring auditing are
identified through a range of processes such as a serious case review and
feedback from front line practitioners. Specific areas of practice that have been
audited include the voice of the child, young peoples access to services, child
sexual exploitation, child sexual abuse, early help work and initial child
protection conferences. There is a rolling programme of repeat audits in areas
where progress has been made but further work is identified. The process of
audit strengthens practice and this is monitored by the Board. A recent example
is improvements in initial child protection case conferences (ICPCs) including in
relation to timescales and in the participation of young people, an area that had
been of concern. A repeat audit on ICPCs is planned for December 2015 to
monitor progress and to further improve young peoples involvement and
contribution.
its business plan. As part of the work being undertaken to address issues
relating to child sexual exploitation and children missing from home or care,
practice guidance has been revised and re-issued. In January 2015 the Boards
Executive group considered questionnaires returned by young people who had


been missing undertaken in response to a survey conducted with the Children
in Care Council. Responses were low and more work to be undertaken on
return interviews was identified for follow up.
in practice. Board members undertook an interactive exercise on real case
studies to test early help thresholds for themselves and have another one
planned on thresholds and neglect. The Board regularly updates policies and
procedures and ensures they are available on the website. Front line staff have
been involved in revisions of policy documents through the Board, resulting in
these staff attending impact evaluation events in September 2014 on the new
procedures.
every two years. Section 11 audits have high completion rates and the
Executive group monitors follow up on areas requiring progress and any nonsubmissions. Progress reports are requested from any partner agencies where
an area of improvement is identified. Education feedback is completed through
the complementary process of the Governors Compliance Checklist. Data on
child sexual exploitation is now requested as part of this return.
the last 12 months. A new training coordinator has been appointed and a
recently refreshed learning and development sub-group has adopted a more
strategic approach and brought a stronger focus on practice development. This
led, for example, to police and health bringing Prevent and the radicalisation
agenda to the sub-group, and raising awareness across agencies. There is a
clear learning pathway, a clear rationale for each course and good follow up
and analysis of impact.
The training coordinator is proactive in chasing up low agency attendance.
Attendance at multi-agency training in 2014-2015 increased overall, with higher
numbers of staff attending from health, police and childrens social care. In
addition, the take up on unlimited e-learning on child sexual exploitation and
awareness of child abuse and neglect has been good with increases of over
missing from home or care have been priority areas in the training programme,
with extra courses made available when courses became fully booked. Two
seminars were offered specifically on raising awareness of the sexual
exploitation of boys and young men.
September 2014 on fabricated or induced illness has resulted in 15 cases being
identified; only one case had previously been recognised.


training has recently been introduced, supporting the broader promotion of the
awareness of safeguarding.
arrangements, although members are aware that further work is required both
to raise awareness and to ensure that vulnerable children are protected through
robust assessments. For example, the Board has identified that school
admissions teams and health partners may be the first to come across such
arrangements.
is confident in his independent role with regard to decision-making. All
decisions by the Chair have been validated by the National Panel of
Independent Experts (NPIE). Agencies undertake learning reviews, for example
in cases that do not meet the threshold for a serious case review. Learning is
then disseminated across the partnership. A recent example is promotion, via
the regular NSCB newsletter, of the Bruising pathway, which alerts
practitioners to the significance of bruising found on non-mobile babies. The
serious incident review sub-group receives referrals from all partner agencies
and monitors the action plans of serious case reviews. The training coordinator
works closely with the serious incident review group to ensure that training
courses link specifically to learning from serious case reviews and action plans
are monitored through the Board. A recent training programme on child sexual
abuse is an example of this. In addition bulletins are sent out to staff with
headline lessons and a presentation for managers to use in team meetings, for
example.
influence. A safeguarding in education event for the main Board in December
mutilation, and a letter was recently sent to all schools about sexting and the
link to potential child sexual exploitation.
each of the sub groups including the Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP). It is
evaluative and analytical. The report includes quotes from young people,
helpful case studies, progress made and areas for future development. The
voice of the child is strong throughout, for example, information on the use of
My Protection Plan and handwritten messages from young people as part of
message in a bottle to the Service Director for Childrens Social Care. The
report specifically includes action taken in response to the Voice of the Child
audit.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Helen Cawston HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Janet Fraser HMI
Team inspectors: Ali Mekki HMI, Karen Wareing HMI, Linda Steele HMI, Louise
Hocking HMI, Nick Stacey HMI, Sean Tarpey, Acting Senior HMI, Steve Stanley HMI.
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


