Oldham Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 22 May 2015  18 June 2015
Report published: 3 August 2015
Childrens services in Oldham require improvement to be good
There are no widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being
harmed or at risk of harm.
However, the authority is not yet delivering good protection and help for children,
young people and families.
The authority is not yet delivering good care for children and young people looked
after.
Leadership, management and governance require improvement when any
widespread or serious failures have been identified by the local authority and they
are being effectively addressed, but the characteristics of good leadership are not in
place.
It is Ofsteds expectation that all children and young people receive the level of help,
care and protection that will ensure their safety and help prepare them for adult life.


Requires improvement

permanence

Requires improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.




Requires improvement
Requires improvement

Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates four childrens homes. All four were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Oldhams safeguarding arrangements was in February
 The previous inspection of Oldhams services for looked after children was in
February 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) has been in post since January 2015.
She is also the Director of Adult Social Care Services.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
July 2014.
 The local authority has delegated its youth offending services to a local voluntary
organisation, Positive Steps.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 57,168 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Oldham. This is 25% of the total population in the area.3
 Approximately 27% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.4
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:5
 in primary schools is 23% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 37% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.6
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British.7


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.
ONS Mid Year 2013.
HMRC Snapshot as at 31 August 2010.
DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics.
ONS 2011 census.


 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:8
 in primary schools is 35% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 27% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 As at May 2015, 1,732 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 1,680
at 31 March 2014.9
 As at May 2015, 329 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 277 at 31 March 2014.10
 As at May 2015, three children were living in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from nine at 31 March 2014.11


Since the last inspection, 12 serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted and six serious case reviews have been completed or were ongoing at the
time of the inspection.

Children looked after in this area
 As at May 2015, 392 children were being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 69 per 10,000 children). This is a very small reduction from 395 (69 per
 Of this number 140 (or 36%) were living outside the local authority area:
authority area
 two in residential special schools out of the authority area
area
 one child is an unaccompanied asylum seeker.
 In the last 12 months there have been:


ONS 2011 census.
DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics.
DfE Characteristics of children in need in England.
DfE Characteristics of children in need in England.
DfE Notifications of private fostering arrangements in England.
DfE Children looked after in England including adoption.


subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
 nine children and young people who have ceased to be looked after and
are now living in houses of multiple occupation, such as supported
accommodation.


Executive summary
Services for children, young people and their families were judged good at the last
inspection in 2012. Since then services for children in need of help and protection,
children looked after and care leavers have not made the progress expected. Some
improvements have been made, such as the timeliness of adoption placements, and
the overall standard of adoption services now is very good. The quality of personal
education plans and the educational attainment and progress of children looked after
and care leavers is not yet good enough. While the vast majority of children in
Oldham receive services appropriate to their needs, the overall standard of social
work practice is too variable. Some children receive very good quality assessment,
support and services. A small minority of children do not have their full needs
sufficiently well identified to enable effective services to be provided and for their
outcomes to improve.
Children and their families generally experience a timely response to their needs,
with a good offer of early help and statutory support being provided where
necessary. For those children who need a statutory service, many receive a good
standard with thorough assessments, plans and effective interventions. Others
receive less thorough assessments, although the standard of the majority seen were
at least requiring improvement. Some assessments lack detail, do not take the childs
history into account well enough, and do not result in clear, measurable and timebound plans. Children looked after and care leavers receive good support from their
corporate parents in terms of the quality and stability of where they live and access
to health and leisure services. However, too many are not in education, training or
employment.
The variability in recording, supervision and management oversight is a theme across
childrens social care and requires attention to raise the standard to consistently
good. The quality of services for children and families is mixed across childrens
social care. Some work is very good and thorough while other practice is less so.
The councils restructuring in 2014 shared the responsibility for different aspects of
childrens services across different directorates; matrix management arrangements
ensure that the DCS and chief executive have oversight of all aspects of childrens
services. There has been an appropriate focus on identified areas of weakness such
as the timeliness of initial child protection conferences and the need for independent
reviewing officers to speak privately with children before their meetings, but
improvements are slow. The variable quality of assessments, supervision and
management oversight within childrens social care is increasingly well understood by
the senior leadership team since the DCS took up post in January 2015. Some
measures are in place to raise standards, but there is more to do to drive progress
quickly enough. The DCS is also responsible for adult social care and is promoting
good links between both aspects of social care services although it is early days in
terms of impact.
The leader of the council, the lead member for children, the chief executive and the
DCS all report good and appropriate relationships between political leaders and


senior officers. The priority given to childrens safeguarding and welfare is
exemplified in continuing efforts to protect childrens services from budgetary
reductions. Regular meetings are held that demonstrate scrutiny and challenge, and
political leaders are knowledgeable about the wider issues facing childrens services.
There are well-established arrangements in place between partnerships such as the
Community Safety Partnership, Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), Local
Adult Safeguarding Board (LASB) and the Health and Wellbeing Board. All execute
their functions appropriately. Some communication arrangements between these
partnerships has been formalised and some senior officers are represented on more
than one board, which assists the flow of information. There is a need to clarify and
formalise accountability, reporting and challenge arrangements so that areas of
common concern, for example children living with domestic abuse, have appropriate
services to meet their needs.
Good commissioning arrangements are in place to use third sector services
appropriately, such as undertaking return interviews for children who have gone
missing. However shortfalls in services have not been addressed swiftly enough, for
example return interviews were not completed to the expected standard in 201415.
This has had a detrimental impact on tackling children going missing, as the
intelligence gathered through return interviews has not been informing a strategic
approach.
The challenge of recruiting and retaining social workers is well understood within
childrens social care and good efforts are made to attract new staff. However, the
workforce strategy does not take sufficient account of current and future pressures
to inform contingency and forward planning arrangements. Although social workers
report that they feel supported and valued in Oldham and have manageable
caseloads, staff turnover has resulted in newly qualified social workers accounting for
over 40% of all social workers responsible for safeguarding. Within childrens social
care, there is a need to improve the quality of supervision and management
oversight of social work practice across the service; it is currently variable and too
much is not yet good.
The senior leadership team recognises the need to improve the quality of
performance information and good efforts are underway to achieve this. Current
performance data does not consolidate and highlight all trends and provide
explanatory narratives. Routine auditing of childrens files is robust and identifies
strengths and weaknesses. Shortfalls are not always fully addressed and
recommendations made are not always followed through.
There is a good strategic response to major criminal activity such as child sexual
exploitation, human trafficking and drug distribution. Effective working across
partner agencies means that the links between these criminal activities are becoming
increasingly well understood. This in turn is enabling partners to protect children and
young people more effectively.


Recommendations

Auditing of childrens cases should ensure that all shortfalls in practice are
identified, addressed and checked to ensure compliance (paragraphs 33, 154).


Ensure that all social workers benefit from good management oversight and
supervision that provides direction, is well recorded, improves the quality of
work with children and young people and is consistently of good quality
(paragraphs 33, 34, 35, 138, 152, 153).


Performance management systems must enable staff and managers, in
particular those with responsibility for care leavers services, to understand the
strengths and weaknesses of their service so remedial action can be taken
promptly (paragraphs 139, 147).


Ensure children and young people have good quality assessments and plans
which are up to date, take account of historical information, prioritise tasks and
ascribe actions within clear timescales (paragraphs 25, 27, 43, 54, 56, 58, 75,


Ensure that strategy meetings include staff who are responsible for any
subsequent child protection investigations (paragraph 24).


Children and young people on child protection plans must receive statutory
visits in line with the local authoritys expectations (paragraph 30).


Make sure core groups and child protection conferences are recorded in
sufficient detail to show the progress made and reflect the views of
participants. Childrens contribution to child protection conferences should be
strengthened (paragraphs 27, 36).


Ensure that independent reviewing officers (IROs) robustly challenge plans for
children where there is drift and gather the views of children and young people
before statutory meetings (paragraphs 28, 92, 155).


Track all childrens cases through legal proceedings from the pre-proceedings
stage to the making of final orders to ensure that drift and delay are avoided
(paragraphs 62, 148).

with complex needs so that they receive all the services they are entitled to,
including support from the aftercare service (paragraph 122).
can expect from their corporate parents in addition to the more generic
guidance currently available (paragraph 136).


electronic records so that this information is clear and accessible and can fully
influence planning (paragraphs 44, 59).
who go missing as for young females who go missing (paragraph 45).
childrens and young peoples learning and ensure that schools inside and
outside the borough monitor its impact (paragraph 77).
be fully recorded so respective responsibilities and tasks are clear (paragraph


Summary for children and young people
 Council bosses and senior managers want to make sure all children and young
people in Oldham get good services that meet their needs and give them best
start in life. Inspectors spoke to staff and managers in the council, carers,
children and young people, and looked at a lot of childrens and young peoples
files. This helped us understand what is working well now and also how the
council can improve the help it provides.
 Most services for children and young people in Oldham have been judged to
require improvement because they are not all good. The adoption service is very
good. Staff work hard to make sure that if adoption is the best plan for a child,
they are found a family as quickly as possible.
 The Children in Care Council (CiCC) has a big impact on how children and young
people are looked after and given support in Oldham. The local politicians and
council managers listen to and act on what the CiCC says. The CiCC has helped to
design things like leaflets that will really help other children and young people in
the future.
 Oldham works hard to recruit enough social workers and there are not many
vacancies. This means that all children and young people who need a social
worker have one. Children and young people do not like having to change social
workers and some have had lots of different ones. Social workers, particularly
those that are newly qualified, need better supervision and guidance from their
manager so that they are helped to support children and young people better.
 Children, young people and their families who need help get assessments, social
work support and other services. Children and young people benefit from this
support. Some assessments need to be better at taking everything into account,
such as what has happened to children and young people in the past. Plans need
to be clearer about what everyone is expected to do to improve things for
children and young people.
 Children and young people only become looked after when they need to. There
are enough foster places for all looked after children to be able to live in Oldham
or nearby with a family that is right for them. The council needs to improve the
information it gives to care leavers about what they are entitled to, and increase
the choice of accommodation so care leavers have the right support for as long
as they need it, and can learn to live independently and cope on their own.
 Oldham needs to do more to help looked after young people do better in
education so they get more qualifications, get the chance to go on training
courses and get jobs. Too many young people are not doing any of these things
at the moment.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Agencies work together well to address the needs of those vulnerable children and
young people in Oldham who need help at a lower level than statutory social work
support. The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) responds promptly to contacts
and concerns. Strategy meetings are well attended by partner agencies and chaired
by a social work manager but do not always include the social worker who will
undertake the subsequent intervention. There is effective information-sharing in
relation to children who go missing, those who may be at risk of child sexual
exploitation and those at risk of domestic abuse, but the risk of sexual exploitation is
not considered by practitioners in relation to boys and young men well enough. The
newly commissioned service that undertakes return home interviews is showing
improved performance but the records of interviews are not always added to the
childs file, and this hampers risk assessment and planning for them.
The quality of management and supervision of social workers is mixed. This
variability is evident across the full spectrum of childrens safeguarding services.
Management oversight is recorded too briefly in both supervision files and on
childrens files, although social workers report good access to managers and advice.
There is a lack of evidence of reflective supervision supporting good quality social
work practice.
Auditing of childrens case files is effective in identifying both strengths and
weaknesses in practice. Audits correctly identified shortfalls in practice, resulting in
most of these being promptly addressed. However, some deficiencies have not been
rectified and the lack of robust follow up by auditors or managers means that
learning from auditing is limited in driving up practice standards.
Most children and young people experience timely assessments and interventions,
resulting in improved safety and better outcomes. The quality of assessments is
variable  from requiring improvement to good. The better ones take account of less
explicit risk factors and historical information. Plans also vary in quality and there is a
need to prioritise actions so that the most urgent are clear. Initial child protection
conferences are thorough and well recorded. Review conferences and core groups
are timely and well attended but records of these are too focused on future actions
and lack detail about progress since the last meeting and the views of attendees.
Childrens views are not always considered at conferences and advocates are underused. Good efforts are made to see children on child protection plans in their family
home but insufficient consideration is given to what action is needed when social
workers are unable to gain access to children on a child protection plan.
The local authority designated officers (LADO) records are poor and do not always
demonstrate all actions taken and decisions agreed.


Inspection findings
access to appropriate early help for families. The early help service framework
has a strong emphasis on coordination and learning lessons from the effective
Troubled Families programme. At October 2014 680 families were in receipt of
targeted support from this programme, with 80% showing improvement in
some aspect of their lives, for example better school attendance by children.
Service improvements arising from the re-organisation includes a single point of
contact and clear routes for agencies and the public to receive advice, make
referrals and be signposted to appropriate services. Inspectors saw very good
multi-agency coordinated responses being offered to families according to their
needs.
undertakes an early help assessment and secures appropriate services from a
range of commissioned providers. Although the re-design of early help services
is relatively recent, from cases seen it appears to be effective with staff using
agreed tools to assess need and help families access the right services. In
October 2014 there were 305 assessments but by April 2015 this had risen to
and this is effective in maintaining a swift and appropriate response to needs
and risks.
Partner agencies are positive about the support and guidance they are able to
access, for example in relation to early help, safeguarding, radicalisation and
child sexual exploitation. The threshold and continuum of need document is
clear and valued by partner agencies. As a result, thresholds for childrens
social care services are better understood.
to either early help or childrens social care as appropriate. The volume of
contacts has increased from 351 per 10,000 in April 2014 to 380 in April 2015,
attributed to an increased understanding and positive impact of the MASH. The
number of children in need of statutory social work support has also risen in
that time period from 1,374 to 1,450. Although re-referrals within 12 months
increased in successive quarters in 201415, the rate of 14% for quarter 4 is
still comparatively low but is being closely scrutinised by managers to ensure it
does not rise to a point which might indicate the initial response was
insufficient to meet need. The most recent nationally published data for 2013
and the England level (23%).
representatives, including early help, adult safeguarding, community safety,
health safeguarding staff, police public protection staff and domestic violence


specialists. This supports prompt and effective information-sharing and joint
planning. However, while these activities occur regularly, case recording does
not always reflect the richness of discussions and decisions made. In a small
number of cases seen, there was insufficient consideration by social workers of
historical matters. This resulted in a few children being inappropriately
signposted to early help services, which meant that they were re-referred for
social work assessment once the level of need and risk had been enquired into
more thoroughly. The robustness of these step up arrangements ensures that
children receive a service appropriate to their level of need and risks.
the level of statutory intervention, have their needs considered at weekly
meetings. The meetings are well run, attended by a very wide range of
agencies, consider the needs of families in detail and identify appropriate
support services which are promptly put in place to help families.
who are reported as missing, at risk of child sexual exploitation and those at
risk from domestic abuse. The managers ability to access the police national
computer system enhances her ability to carry out further checks if necessary.
Childrens social care staff participate fully in the police-led Operation
Challenger, which tackles organised and serious crime. Weekly meetings,
convened by the police, ensure information about organised crime is linked to
emerging and known concerns about vulnerable adults and children to
maximise opportunities to disrupt illegal activity, prevent harm and rescue
those already experiencing harm. Silo thinking is avoided and links between
different types of criminal activity and their impact on vulnerable people is
becoming increasingly well understood. Close liaison between the council and
the police has raised awareness of radicalisation and provided guidance to
partner agencies about what to do if they have concerns. The regular Channel
panel considers all referrals in detail, ensuring they are assessed for
engagement, capacity and intent and followed up as necessary. Strong support
from a wide variety of council and other relevant agencies, such as the MASH,
benefits agencies and housing providers, maximises the effectiveness of these
arrangements and maintains a clear focus on the welfare of children who may
be identified by either the Challenger or Channel forums.
service for children and adults outside office hours, although records of social
work activity are too brief in a minority of cases and of a lower standard than
daytime services. Handover arrangements between EDT and daytime services
are seamless, and outstanding tasks are followed through promptly. The MASH
team manager provides good support to EDT staff.
held in the MASH before cases are passed to the childrens assessment team
(CAT). Strategy discussions are always chaired by a social work manager.
However, social workers from the CAT are not always available to attend the


strategy meetings so do not hear at first-hand what the issues are and what
other information is known; they rely on information and guidance from the
social work manager and the written record of the strategy discussion. The
quality of the recording of these meetings is variable. Some good examples
were seen but others lack sufficient detail, including specific actions about how
agencies will review the progress of the work.
inspection, the CAT was not fully staffed, which means priority is given to child
protection cases over those requiring assessment to determine level of need.
This means some children experience some delay. The quality of the work in
the team varies, with some good practice seen. Inspectors also saw poorer
assessments that lacked a focus on key issues or were poorly recorded,
although no children were left at risk as a result.
The local authority reports that this has been due to a misinterpretation of
national guidance. Local processes have very recently been amended to rectify
this. The local authoritys figures for conferences held within 15 days are 57%
in quarter 3 of 201415 and 61% in quarter 4. However, 25% of all
conferences were held on the 16th day and this shows improving performance
overall. Managers are closely monitoring the revised arrangements to improve
timeliness but it is too soon to see any impact of this. ICPCs are well attended
by relevant partner agencies and are very well recorded. Risks are considered
well and children who require a child protection plan are identified
appropriately.
thorough. However, many contain large numbers of actions. These need
prioritising to ensure that the most urgent or significant needs are highlighted
and receive the most focus. In the majority of cases actions are set out but
require more detail about who is responsible for each one and the timescales
for expected completion. Most review child protection conferences (RCPCs) are
timely. Social workers routinely update their assessments for RCPCs but the
level of detail underpinning assessments varies. Some are very good but some
require improvement. RCPCs are recorded by way of a chairs summary which
includes a good level of detail in the decisions and actions agreed upon.
However no other notes are formally made of the RCPCs so it is not clear what
the distance travelled by the family is, whether risks have increased or
diminished, the contributions made by partner agencies and any different views
expressed. Although a note about any challenge raised by the chair is made
separately on the childs file, the content of this is not included. Core groups
are recorded in a similar manner and although some social workers keep a
separate note of the meeting, this is ad hoc and does not address the current
weaknesses in recording practices seen during this inspection across the range
of services.


prepare for conferences. A conference observed during the inspection was well
attended, chaired effectively and considered risks well. The vast majority of
reports are available before the conference, but not all are provided early
enough for families to absorb their content. The local authority has a notice of
concern and dispute resolution log for conference chairs and IROs to use and
track matters they have raised, including the occasional late presentation of
some reports. This is used appropriately to notify social work managers and
staff of shortfalls, but the IRO service acknowledges that it needs to chase up
and escalate matters more robustly to achieve the improvement intended.
at core groups as an issue of concern and has targeted this effectively.
Performance has improvement significantly and core groups are now well
attended and timetabled. However, inspectors saw a minority of cases where
core groups had not been held in the expected timescales. In others, the childs
record shows a core group meeting was held but the electronic template was
not completed.
carers by both social workers and family support workers that effectively
reduced risk in families. Children subject to child protection plans are visited
regularly and most children on a plan have support from both a social worker
and a family support worker, increasing the range and volume of support and
contact with the children and their parents. Good efforts are made to engage
families, including those who are initially reluctant for various reasons.
However, inspectors saw a minority of cases where the recording of visits did
not make it clear what the purpose of the visit was, which children or adults
were seen and spoken to, and whether statutory visits were meeting expected
timescales. In a minority of cases, successive or frequent visits where no access
to the family home was gained did not lead to a sufficiently detailed reflection
between the social worker and their manager about whether an alternative
approach was warranted. For a very small number of children on child
protection plans, essential actions were underway but were taking a long time
to be implemented and make a positive difference, such as the provision of
specialist support services following referrals being made to help families tackle
complex issues and improve the quality of their parenting.
agencies and family members. In the majority of step down cases sampled,
practice was good and led to appropriate less intensive support services. In two
cases out of 10 sampled, there was insufficient consideration of all the risks to
the children and young people and the step down plan was premature.
about having too many changes of social worker. One young person with a
child protection plan told inspectors she had experienced changes of social


worker very often in CAT and now had a social worker from a long-term team
whom she didnt see much.
and analysis; others are too brief. A key impact of poorer quality recording is
that it inhibits robust management oversight of social work practice. Some
social workers benefit from thorough supervision, but the majority of
supervision files seen during the inspection show that supervision is too
infrequent. Some records consist mainly of summaries of current cases rather
than detailed reflection and agreements about next steps. The local authoritys
routine quality auditing of cases was seen on cases sampled and these were
thorough. The audits resulted in the majority of remedial actions being
undertaken, but not all shortfalls were addressed in every case and there is a
shortfall in the rigour with which follow-up occurs to ensure compliance. This
limits the effectiveness of the quality auditing programme.
promptly to a social worker. In a minority of cases, children with a child
protection plan are allocated to workers who are in their first year of
employment. Newly qualified social workers (NQSWs) benefit from protected
caseloads, specialist support from a senior practitioner mentor as well as
management supervision and support. However, the variability in the records of
supervision seen means that the local authority cannot be certain that the
oversight of cases held by NQSWs through formal supervision is as strong as it
needs to be.
across childrens social care and requires attention to raise the standard to
consistently good.
including the early help strategy. Their involvement has led to improvements in
some areas, for example the development of leaflets for those involved in child
protection enquiries. In the vast majority of cases, childrens views are
documented in assessments and reports to child protection conferences. The
extent of participation at child protection conferences is difficult to determine
because the local authority does not clearly differentiate between children
contributing to a child protection conference and looked after children
contributing to their reviews. Of the 646 children over the age of four who were
the subject of a review or a conference in 201415 597 attended or conveyed
their feelings in some way, but only one young person has attended a child
protection conference in the last six months. The commissioned advocacy
service has been under-used, although this has improved from 29 referrals for
advocates in 201314 to 59 in 201415. The local authority has recently
amended the referral process for this service with the intention of triggering
greater uptake, but further work is needed to increase awareness of the
resource and use it to benefit children and young people who are subject to
child protection conferences.


particular strength is direct work with children, increasing their awareness of
safeguarding issues. The team has recently been strengthened with the
addition of staff who have significant child protection experience.
plans, in particular for those minority ethnic communities who have been
settled in Oldham for some time. The local authority is aware of the need to do
more to understand the needs of more recent arrivals such as families from
East European countries and Roma communities, which are significantly
expanding in the borough.
substance misuse and mental ill-health, extrapolated from the number of adults
who are in receipt of a service, is used to good effect to estimate the impact on
children. For example, from the 130 domestic violence notifications per quarter
from the police, the local authority estimates that there are approximately 520
children living in households with domestic abuse. Similar exercises inform
estimates of children living with a parent who suffers from mental ill-health or
has substance misuse difficulties, and those who may be experiencing neglect.
This provides a good baseline for planning service delivery and meeting
childrens needs where the potential for harm or neglect is apparent. The local
authority is aware that more analysis is required to help identify children
experiencing hidden harm and to provide or commission services that meet
their needs.
considered by the MASH and sent for a social care assessment if required. The
most serious cases of domestic abuse requiring multi-agency risk assessment
conferences (MARACs) take good account of childrens needs and the risks to
them. Services for victims of domestic abuse have improved and independent
domestic violence advisers (IDVAs) can now offer support to all victims, not just
those at the highest risk. This has led to approximately 750 adults being
supported, an increase of 75 on the previous year.
of sexual exploitation or serious domestic abuse and known sex offenders. Led
by the police and well attended by a range of agencies, these high quality
information-sharing and problem-solving meetings enable effective and creative
solutions to tackle complex issues including the identification of individuals who
present a potential risk to children. For instance, there has been some good
work tackling children going missing by photos being circulated through Pub
Watch.
pan-Greater Manchester guidance. There is good liaison with community
leaders. Specialist local charities are supported to train professionals and
provide support to victims. The community safety teams risk-mapping of local


minority ethnic communities has enabled targeted interventions to be focused
on those schools which have high numbers of pupils from the most at risk
communities. No child victims of FGM have come to the attention of childrens
services, but hospital staff have recently referred two cases of pregnant women
who had been subject to FGM. Appropriate child protection enquiries were
initiated as a consequence to ensure that the mothers were able to protect
their children in the future.
specialist police and social workers and is effective. The team has recently been
strengthened with additional social care capacity and further expansion is
planned. There are good awareness-raising activities such as the week of
action, which included visits to all the hotels in Oldham. It also included
distribution of leaflets, wristbands being given out in schools and colleges, all
secondary schools having two performances of a specialist play, bespoke
sessions held for minority ethnic womens groups, and one teacher from every
school attending a training the trainers session. In total, over 10,000 children
and young people have attended awareness-raising events in schools. Sixty
imams have attended and more awareness-raising across all communities in
Oldham is planned. While this is a strong aspect of the work to tackle child
sexual exploitation, direct work with children is more variable. Eight childrens
files were sampled from a list of recent cases supplied by the local authority. In
three of these cases, there had been an appropriate response with effective
work leading to safer behaviour by the young people. In the other five cases,
the response was not sufficiently robust, with weaker assessments, planning
and interventions. Overall, the response from childrens services to child sexual
exploitation lacks consistency with some risks taking too long to identify and
respond to.
missing episode received a timely return interview. The local authority
commissioned a new provider from April 2015 to deliver a service for children
who go missing from home as well as those who go missing from care. Current
performance data shows an improvement in the percentage of return home
interviews with young people within 72 hours and is currently above 80%.
While this is an improving picture, there is more to do to ensure that all
children and young people who go missing are offered an interview on their
return. The record made of the return interview by the commissioned service is
not always sent through to be added to the childs electronic record, and this
means the information gleaned from the interviews does not promptly and
routinely inform the childs plan.
exploitation are considered. Risk assessment tools are completed, referrals to
the Phoenix project are made and direct work is undertaken that reduces risk.
However, when boys and young men go missing, the risks associated with child
sexual exploitation are not automatically considered, so these young people
may be left at risk.


are missing from education. The authority makes extensive efforts to locate
children who require a school place but are missing from education. Attendance
officers visit every family whose children do not attend school to encourage
attendance. Good use is made of legal powers: in the 10 months leading up to
this inspection, 35 school attendance pre-order letters were sent to parents
resulting in 28 enrolments. Seven school attendance proceedings are in
progress. Every child of school age is allocated a place within 10 days of being
notified. In the academic year 201415, 1,067 children moved into and out of
the borough.
per week in Oldham is undertaken by the local authority and broad information
about their activities is collated. This needs to be more detailed and include, for
example, the topics which children study in alternative provision. The virtual
school does not scrutinise these childrens educational plans, so is unable to be
assured that the provision will increase the childrens chances of joining
mainstream provision and succeed. A minority of children receive only a few
hours of education per a week and the virtual school does not know how these
children spend the rest of their time. As a consequence of these gaps in
knowledge, the virtual school has initiated a full review of the less-than-twentyfive-hours provision to improve its effectiveness.
who are home educated  100 children at the time of the inspection. The local
authority monitors these children closely, provides support to the children and
their families, and monitors trends. All families are visited and given advice.
Safeguarding issues seen are passed promptly to childrens social care.
agencies and the wider public. A good leaflet and practitioners guide have been
produced, and a range of awareness-raising events took place in July 2014,
with plans to conduct similar activities this year. Pilot work with one secondary
school has led to a private fostering notification and this is to be rolled out to
other schools in the future. Despite this, the number of referrals remains low at
three. The quality of ongoing social work support these children receive is
inconsistent, although all have had an assessment of need and suitability.
the aftercare service or the housing department as homeless or at risk of
homelessness. These include mediation services to help resolve family
problems, the adolescent support unit which provides short term
accommodation and intensive family support to help resolve the issues that led
to the young person leaving the family home. All homeless young people are
jointly assessed within 24 hours by a social worker and housing officer, using
an appropriate assessment tool.


the local Muslim community, such as imams, regarding the role of the LADO
and wider safeguarding issues. This has had a positive impact and referrals
have increased to 103 in 201415  an increase from 98 in 201314 and 69 in
individual adults who are referred are weak. They do not make clear what
actions are to be taken and by which agency or personnel. Contact with other
agencies is not noted and there are no clear outcomes. This means it is not
clear which agency is responsible for specific actions. This risks both omissions
and duplication of effort.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
The majority of children looked after have good assessments of their needs which
are updated regularly and inform planning. In a small minority of cases the
assessments need to be more thorough and updated. This variability reflects the
variability seen for children who receive help and protection services.
Reviews are timely and take good account of the views of children and young
people. Because of high workloads, independent reviewing officers (IROs) do not
always speak to children privately before their reviews, do not always monitor their
progress between reviews in sufficient detail, and have not been able to challenge
drift. Additional capacity has now been provided for the service to rectify this.
There is a good range of placements and most children are placed close to home,
with brothers and sisters, and do not move unnecessarily. Children looked after are
cared for well by foster carers and other carers.
Children looked after and care leavers have their health needs met promptly. The
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) is beginning to show a positive
impact.
The Children in Care Council is active and its members are influential participants in
the corporate parenting group.
Children who need an adoptive family have their needs met very well. Recruitment
processes are successful and good post-adoption support is provided.
Return interviews for looked after children and care leavers who go missing are
improving, but records of these need to be included on their files to inform planning.
The risks to boys and young men who go missing are not considered well enough.
The virtual school keeps a good overview of the progress of children looked after and
care leavers, and there is a clear understanding of what improvements are required
to help children do better. The quality of personal education plans is inconsistent and
too few children looked after achieve five good GCSEs. The overall impact of the
pupil premium is unknown although individual children have benefited.
Children who require legal protection are not systematically tracked from the earliest
point to the making of final orders to reduce drift and delay. Family group
conferencing needs to be developed further to help families support their children.
Care leavers are positive about the support they receive and have good relationships
with their support workers. However, their pathway plans lack ambition for them and
need to be more specific about the support young people will receive. Care leavers
do not have written information about their entitlements from Oldham. The care
leaving service does not have robust performance data to help drive forward service
improvements.


Inspection findings
responded to well in most cases, and is reduced because appropriate decisions
for children to become looked after remove them from risky situations.
assessments is not consistent and some do not cover all the key issues. Others
have weak analysis of the information presented. Better assessments are
thorough and analytical, with some appropriately presented as social workers
reports for childrens looked after reviews.
childs circumstances well; in others it is limited, lacking clarity about the
chronology of events so it is not always easy to follow a childs story.
to date and some are too basic or are reactive to events rather than driving
forward planned improvements. This means it is not clear what is to be done,
who will do it and when it will be done by.
communication and joint working by social workers with other agencies such as
schools, placement providers and CAMHS. Where this is not done as well,
liaison is not effective, and agencies are not regularly kept up to date or
consulted about planning.
when a child goes missing. The MASH receives a list of missing children each
day. It is clear which children have gone missing from care and includes
detailed information about the length of time missing, and events that occurred
immediately upon their return. Social workers are advised promptly. This is
monitored on a daily basis by senior managers in childrens social care. There is
a clear escalation process of meetings in place and this is accurately reflected in
childrens electronic files. At the second stage, missing meetings are chaired
independently by an IRO. However, although meetings do consider key issues
such as push and pull factors, they do not always produce clear plans with
specific objectives and outcomes.
childrens files, either in the form of records of the actual interviews, or in case
notes indicating that young people have been spoken to. This means that
opportunities to learn and protect some children from these episodes are lost.
The local authority is currently developing its electronic case recording system
to enable return interviews to be captured, but this is not yet fully developed.
care are good. These children continue to receive social work support for a
period, once home.


care order, assessment is appropriate. However, plans to revoke care orders for
children placed with parents are not consistently pursued in a timely fashion, so
some children remain in care for longer than they should. As at 31 March 2014,
statistical neighbours and 5% nationally.
Law Outline is inconsistent and not all of this work progresses as quickly or as
effectively as it should. The local authority does not track cases from preproceedings work through to the conclusion of proceedings. This means that
managers cannot see when cases are not moving forward in childrens
timescales.
offered weekly by the local authoritys legal services. Arrangements are in place
to provide legal advice at short notice in emergencies. Letters written to
parents when the local authority is considering entering legal proceedings are
clear about the concerns and what parents need to do, though they are not
always written in language that would be easy for parents to understand.
conferences; this area of work is not sufficiently well developed to consistently
allow families to participate in developing plans for children or to identify
alternative carers for them.
fourth quarter of 201415 shows that the local authority is completing
proceedings in an average of 33 weeks. Timescales outside the expected 26
weeks are seen across other local authorities in the region and the local
authority has been involved in work with partners on the Local Family Justice
Board (LFJB) to understand why this is. This work has led to actions to reduce
these timescales being agreed between the local authorities represented on the
LFJB and the judiciary, although the impact of this work has yet to be seen.
positive about the work the local authority presents to court in care
proceedings. Social workers and IROs work well with childrens guardians, keep
them up to date and involve them appropriately in the planning for children.
workers, their views are sought and they are involved in developing plans for
their futures. In some cases, parents are also well engaged in the planning for
their children. However, children are not always clear what these plans are and
their relationships with social workers are not always strong because many
have had several changes of social worker.


looked after review, but this is not always followed through robustly where the
permanence plan does not include adoption. Some children experience delay in
achieving permanence. Some permanence options have broken down and no
alternative is identified within the childs timescale. In better cases, permanence
planning meetings are held and clear plans put in place in a timely way. Positive
work has been undertaken to formalise the placements of children in long-term
foster care.
provision that children looked after receive, and understands areas for further
development. The virtual schools self-evaluation is thorough and accurate and
sets out well the schools ambitions for children looked after. This analysis has
resulted in a range of improvements, for example the attendance rate of
children looked after has improved to 94%. In 2014, 13% of children looked
after attending secondary schools had low attendance rates, which is much
higher than the rates for all Oldham pupils. The local authority acknowledges
further improvement is required to close the attendance gap between these
children and all Oldham pupils. The number of children looked after who are
absent for 25 days or more continues to decrease. In 201213, 42 were absent
for 25 days or more; in 201314 this had improved to eight. Currently there are
no children looked after who have been absent more than 25 days.
ensured that no looked after child was excluded from a school in 2014. In the
current year to date, no children looked after have been permanently excluded.
reading, writing and mathematics at Key Stage 2 improved to 78%, 62% and
gap between looked after childrens achievements and other children in Oldham
narrowed. Further improvements are required so that the achievement gap
between these children and other children continues to reduce.
in reading, writing or mathematics. In the same year, the proportion of children
looked after achieving five good GCSEs including English and mathematics
declined sharply and was low at around 8%. This is a sharp increase in the
achievement gap between children looked after and other children in Oldham.
Current information provided by the local authority indicates that only four
(20%) children looked after are expected to achieve five good GCSEs including
mathematics and English, which is poor.
suit them best. The vast majority of looked after primary-aged children attend
good or better schools. Approximately 58% of all looked after secondary-aged
children are able to attend good or better schools. For those attending a
secondary school in Oldham this reduces to 40% because only four secondary


schools in Oldham are judged to be good or better. Around 30% of children
looked after attend schools outside the local authority. Oldham receives some
information about the progress of these children. This needs to be more
detailed and frequent so that staff can provide timely support to improve
performance.
at risk from bullying and harassment. The team works closely with those who
are at the highest risk of dropping out of school and those who have very poor
performance. During the spring term they supported 82 children looked after 
provide good training to foster carers and advice regarding childrens emotional
well-being and behaviour management. Carers report this has helped them to
provide better care for the children they look after.
very poor. They lack sufficient focus on educational attainment and skill
development. Too many do not include ambitious or aspirational targets and
are broad and non-specific. As a consequence, they are not sufficiently useful
for looked after children to be clear what they need to do or to enable progress
to be measured against targets.
commissioned service but there are no clear arrangements whereby this advice
can inform childrens PEPs and pathway plans. This means that education
planning does not take account of the holistic advice that the young people
have received.
with extra teaching sessions, educational trips and learning resources.
However, the arrangements to allocate and monitor the impact of pupil
premium funding are under-developed and its impact cannot be demonstrated
as a whole. The local authority recognises this and new arrangements are being
developed that are intended to strengthen the allocation and monitoring of
impact.
to pursue hobbies and leisure interests. Carers are aware of and able to
exercise delegated authority appropriately.
financial support. For example, they attend educational events and activities
that develop their self-confidence and team working. However, their
entitlements are not promoted well enough, either through the local authoritys
website or via clear locally produced written information.
should do. The nursing service for children looked after oversees reminders for


initial health assessments and reviews to ensure these are undertaken within
expected timescales. Initial health assessments are undertaken by
paediatricians, with reviews carried out by health visitors or school nurses as
appropriate. The nurse for children looked after undertakes health assessments
for young people aged 16 and over. She is available for consultation about
more complex cases. Children looked after living outside the borough have their
health assessments completed near to where they live unless it is convenient
for them and their carers to come to Oldham.
assessments to other health professionals to try to ensure consistency and raise
standards; a sample is audited quarterly to check compliance. However, health
assessments seen by inspectors are not always completed well. Only half the
sample have assessments that would clearly help a carer understand and meet
that childs health needs. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are regularly
completed for children aged four and over, but the outcomes from these often
do not feed into health assessments, weakening their value.
range of interventions to meet different levels of need. This includes training for
foster carers, consultations for social workers and carers about individual
children, and a service providing assessment and support for individual children
and young people. Early evaluation of training for foster carers that focused on
attachment issues was positive and shows they became more resilient as
carers, thus promoting greater placement stability.
compares with 11% in 201314, and a statistical neighbour rate of 9%. For
longer term stability, there has been a steady improvement over the three
years up to 2014. This improved to 62% in 2013-14 but is still below statistical
neighbours (69%) and England (67%) rates and requires further improvement.
or subject to a final warning or reprimand during the year to April 2015 was
lower than both the statistical neighbour and national levels for 201314.
large majority of cases, for example by helping them change negative
behaviours. Some examples were seen of inappropriate placements for older
children, attributable to the shortfall in choice for the older age group.
than the previous year, overall the in-house fostering service has been
successful in recruiting carers. There is a sufficient choice of placements for
most children but less choice for older children. The local authority recognises
that it has more to do to ensure that all adolescents can be offered a foster


placement when they become looked after rather than going to a childrens
home.
brothers and sisters this is achieved in most cases. Children are supported well
to have contact with their siblings, although some say they do not see the
adults that are important to them as often as they would like, for example
grandparents and friends. Most children looked after (87%) are placed within
guardianship orders where this is in the childs best interests, but carers report
reluctance because this legal arrangement gives them less assurance about
sustainable income than fostering does. The local authority is aware of this and
is working to increase the reassurance it can provide to foster carers. Currently,
the local authority financially supports 119 child arrangement and special
guardianship orders outside of public care.
with children experiencing drift and delay as a result. For other children in these
circumstances, assessments are timely; they identify strengths and risks, and
appropriately consider options for the children.
national standards for training, support and development.
information is available to inform its decision-making. Careful consideration is
given to approving carers and matching children. The fostering services
decision maker has full information available to enable them to make
considered decisions promptly.
The participation of children is evident in a majority of cases. However, IROs
have not always spoken to children privately before their reviews due to high
workloads. The IRO service has recently had its capacity increased and this is a
key improvement target for the future, but performance so far has not been
good enough. The high caseloads have also meant that IROs have not
monitored childrens progress with sufficient robustness between reviews to
identify any potential drift and delay that require challenging. This is also a key
improvement target for the service.
advocates to support them. One young person described a positive experience
of getting a childrens rights worker involved in a complaint about a placement
move, which had a positive outcome for her.
participation officers. There are good links with the corporate and regional


youth participation network, resulting in successful bids for funding for
development projects. Children in Care Council members are valued and
influential members of the corporate parenting board and are instrumental in
delivering the annual work plan. Five corporate parenting board priorities for
this year derive from the Children in Care Councils review of the local
authoritys pledge to children looked after.
examples where they had clearly informed the choice of foster placement and
adoptive family. However, in a small minority of cases childrens diversity needs
are mentioned in records but it is not clear how they have influenced the childs
plan and services received.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
adoption for those children who need it. A positive focus on adoption is
enhanced by the involvement of the adoption team in the early stages of
childrens care planning.
meetings ensures that the progress of every child who has a plan for adoption
is as streamlined as possible. Delays are avoided or minimised and this is well
evidenced by the data seen on inspection.
worker means that the child permanence report (CPR) and family finding profile
are prepared promptly and are informed by the workers knowledge of the
child. The CPRs are good and enable the agency decision maker to make
sound, well-informed decisions. Co-working facilitates the early identification of
potential links which can be formally pursued once a placement order is
granted. The adoption team has up-to-date intelligence about prospective
adopters gained from well-established collaborative arrangements with Bury
and Rochdale Councils and membership of a placement group along with five
other north west local authorities.
skilled direct work and life story work. The quality and sophistication of
matching practice has prevented disruptions. Some children are placed very
quickly because of early linking, with one child placed within 12 days of the
placement order being granted.
up-to-date knowledge about potential adopters. The local authority routinely
accesses regional resources such as Adoption 22 (the consortium of 23 local
authorities in the north west of England) and explores specialist voluntary
adoption agencies regionally and nationally. It makes good use of the adoption


register. Overall, family finding activity and practice is highly developed,
successful and tenacious. The local authority has commissioned and used three
concurrent placements that have enabled childrens plans to be progressed
swiftly.
year old and eight had Black, Asian or Eastern European heritage. This year so
far 23 children have been placed for adoption including older children, brothers
and sisters, children of various racial and faith backgrounds and children with
complex needs and difficult family backgrounds. This reflects very good
attention to meeting childrens diverse needs.
with legal proceedings ongoing for the remainder. Family finding is challenging
because eight are aged four to seven years old. Seven require placing with
brothers and sisters and four have minority ethnic heritages. It is good that the
authority is tenaciously pursuing potential matches nationally. For a very small
minority, the plan has changed appropriately and permanence has been
achieved with existing carers.
improvement in two out of three key indicators, and the Adoption Leadership
Board considers that performance is improving. However, continual
improvement is needed to meet national targets that are being stretched
annually.
the average time between a child entering care and moving into their adoptive
placement has improved to 472 days from the 538 days average between 2011
and 2014. For children who have waited less than 18 months between entering
care and moving into their adoptive placement there has been an improvement
to 78% from the 61% average between 2011 and 2014. Performance for the
average time between a placement order being granted and a match with
adopters has declined to 220 days from the 201314 average of 213 days. This
is 99 days from the national target.
performance. A key factor is the length of time it has taken to find the right
adopters for particular children. Although the impact on the scorecard is
negative, practice reflects the very positive and successful commitment to
finding adoptive homes. The services increasingly sophisticated ability to
analyse data and monitor trends results in a realistic picture of performance.
During 201516 several adoption orders will be granted for children who have
waited a long time; the local authority is aware of the negative impact this will
have on its future scorecard average.


increase on the 96 made in 201314. The strategy is creative and multifaceted, and informed by the needs of children waiting.
preparation groups quickly because of the effective tri-borough arrangement
with Bury and Rochdale. Adopters spoken to were very positive about their
experience and the insight gained from preparation training. All spoke positively
about the skills, knowledge and sensitivity of the social workers throughout the
assessment process. Comments included the assessment process was really
thorough, a very personal service, and the worker made sure it went at our
pace.
confirms this view. Feedback and learning from the panel are used positively to
develop practice and maintain high standards. The panel chair reports that
applicants are prepared for and well supported at panel. There are robust and
effective arrangements in place so that the agency decision maker can make
prompt decisions.
under the previous process and were completed within seven months. Of the
five households approved using the stage 1 and stage 2 processes, all were
approved within timescales. In 201415, 22 adoptive households were
approved, a further improvement in numbers from the previous year. Twenty
were approved under the new staged process, with 12 being approved within
six months and eight taking longer than this. The increase in approvals is good
and proactive steps have been taken to streamline processes at stage 1 to
avoid delays that are within the local authoritys control. Some delays are due
to overseas checks and cannot be expedited. This is a consequence of the
success in recruiting families from Asian backgrounds.
and this continues until the adoption order is granted. Social workers skilfully
build on the preparation and life story work done with children prior to
placement to enable them to make relationships and develop attachments.
Practical and emotional support for children and their adopters is responsive to
need. Adopters spoke very highly of the positive impact their workers had, for
example: the worker sorted it out so the clinic stopped using our childs birth
surname, our childs social worker has brought in the life chances team and
virtual school head to work with the new school so he gets the support and
understanding he needs. Adopters value the ongoing availability of support
groups, workshops, celebratory events and training. They were able to explain
how this had helped them understand their children and better meet their
needs.
addition to support groups, childrens groups and ongoing training, the team


co-ordinates 321 letterbox arrangements and supports 14 direct contact
sessions. Seventy-one adoptive households receive financial support.
therapeutic help. They receive individual letters as well as public information
through a variety of media and awareness-raising activities. The local authority
is actively involved in regional work to develop and increase the range of
therapeutic services available.
at any stage of their adoption experience, including access to birth records and
intermediary service for adult adoptees. In 201415 the service responded to
support in letterbox contact and four supporting birth relatives through
adoption of a child, evidencing that this is a valued and effective service.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
but generally around their 16th birthday. Young people are consulted about the
exact time of transfer to avoid times of stress such as exams or key changes in
their lives. Care is taken to minimise the number of changes of allocated
workers a young person experiences.
between 16 and 18 years of age who have been looked after or are in receipt
of a child in need or child protection service. Former relevant young people
receive a service beyond the age of 18, potentially up to the age 25 as needed.
who demonstrate commitment to the young people they work with. They form
strong positive relationships with many young people and are persistent in
maintaining contact with them even through periods when they are reluctant to
stay in touch. In 201314, the service was in touch with 98% of its care leavers
aged 19 to 21 who were looked after when they were 16 years old. This is
better than the statistical neighbours average (78%) and the national average
(83%).
service provided for them and appreciate the consistency and commitment of
their workers. They feel treated as adults and supported to make their own
choices. Workers speak positively about the young people. It is not uncommon
for young people who no longer need or receive a service to keep in touch with
the team, for example to request a reference or to share new achievements.


young-person-friendly venue where a range of universal and targeted services
can be accessed. This includes substance misuse services and personal
counselling. The co-location of many services in the same place where young
people are happy to drop in supports a holistic approach to meeting care
leavers needs, and timely coordination of personalised interventions.
risk of sexual exploitation or those who go missing. Awareness of risk factors is
high in the aftercare service and other commissioned providers. Young people
who are identified as potentially at risk are referred to the Phoenix child sexual
exploitation team for screening and assessment. There is increasing expertise
and good partnership working across the voluntary and statutory sectors to
identify and keep safe young people who are at risk of forced marriage.
level of independent scrutiny of progress. However plans are not consistently
updated between reviews and do not always reflect the work being undertaken,
which is often more detailed and of a better quality than is recorded. Plans take
good account of the views of young people, which are consistently recorded
well. Many workers are not using the plan to record the details of independence
skills the young person needs to develop, and how they will be helped to
develop these. Staff and young people can describe the work which is
underway in better detail than can be gleaned from their case records. Goals
are often too generic and do not set out who is responsible for which actions
and what the expected completion timescales are. Plans take good account of
contact with family members but need to set out more clearly how young
people are going to be provided with the emotional support necessary to help
them cope with the demands of living independently.
staff have a good understanding of why some young people struggle to
maintain a college or work placement, or keep a tenancy. Workers are
tenacious and make good efforts to help young people pick themselves up and
have a second chance. However, there is little evidence of direct work being
done with young people to help them develop insight into why things have
broken down in the past, and how they can develop strategies and resilience to
reduce the likelihood of repetition in the future. Workers are able to describe
the need to do this, but this needs a strong focus.
always sufficiently timely to ensure good forward planning. This is particularly
important for those young people who are not eligible for adult social care
support services but nevertheless require, and are eligible for, an aftercare
service. Examples were seen of young people who had gaps in support because
of this.


accreditation for activities undertaken as members of the Children in Care
Council and to gain experience of using their skills in the wider local authority
environment. For example, care leavers deliver Total Respect training,
participate in staff selection processes, and work as members of the corporate
parenting board.
maintain young people in their placements. This helps children and young
people understand the consequences of their behaviour and make amends
without unnecessarily criminalising them. This is expanding by training peer
mentors. So far six young people have been trained in restorative justice, and it
is planned to link them with childrens homes. This could make a positive
contribution to keeping more children out of the criminal justice system where
appropriate, but it is too early to see its impact.
care leavers. However, too many care leavers are not in education, training or
employment. In 201314 this accounted for 45% of care leavers aged 1921.
The current figure reported by the local authority is that 42% are not in
education, employment or training. The gap between care leavers and other
young people in Oldham is widening. The aftercare team and other
commissioned services work hard to support a significant minority of this group,
around 13% of who have multiple challenges such as engaging in criminal
behaviour or substance misuse problems. Four care leavers are in higher
education. Overall there is an urgent need to increase the proportion of care
leavers staying in employment, education or training.
considering options for their future and to be more stretching. The quality of
advice provided to care leavers about options does not sufficiently promote the
development of their own skills in this area. For example, they are not offered
advice on how to explore different options. The progress of care leavers in
education, employment or training is monitored too infrequently on a collective
basis to prevent drift or patterns of inactivity becoming established. Their
progress is not recorded systematically. The careers advice and guidance that
care leavers receive is not routinely shared with their social workers so does not
inform their pathway plans, and this limits the benefits of the advice. The
council has identified the need to improve its understanding, analysis and
forward planning with regard to care leavers engagement and progress in
education, employment and training, but this is not yet in place.
care leavers to have health assessments. There is equally robust attention paid
to those young people who live outside the borough, and also to young people
who are the responsibility of other local authorities, but who live within the
borough. This ensures that young peoples health needs are met well and they
are encouraged to lead healthy lifestyles.


treatment services which are all co-located with the aftercare services, including
drop-in sessions and a prescribing nurse. The co-location of different health
services supports prompt and coordinated responses to the various health
needs that a young person might have. One example was seen when a care
leaver sought help for one matter and the opportunity was taken to bring his
immunisations up to date. Care leavers who are young parents are able to
access a specialist midwife and the family nurse partnership programme along
with other drop-in facilities. Up-to-date information about how to register with
doctors and dentists including those accepting new patients is readily available.
ages was commissioned to provide counselling and support to prevent selfharm. This new service supplements another community-based emotional
support service which is exclusively for young people. These services provide
choice, improve capacity, and enable continuity of help into adulthood if
necessary. It is too early to see the impact of the new service yet.
insurance numbers, passports and income benefit entitlements, but they are
not provided with an account of their health history. A current pilot is testing
out a method of providing health histories but this has not yet led to this gap
being addressed.
to date only four are in place. The new policy is clear about respective
responsibilities and includes comprehensive information on the financial and
legal implications of arrangements. There is more to do to promote and embed
this option for those young people who would be best supported through a
staying put arrangement.
accordance with their care plans. Risk assessments are of good quality and
decision-making is clear. Account is taken of the timing of the return home of
brothers and sisters. There is good joint working between partner agencies to
support these young people, and child protection plans are put in place when
necessary. Care leavers over the age of 16 who no longer need a child
protection plan continue to have their progress reviewed in conjunction with
younger brothers and sisters who remain on child protection plans. This
ensures effective joint working between all the childrens social workers. It also
takes good account of the relationships and contact between family members.
accommodation. There are two designated places in supported accommodation
for young parents and this meets their needs well. Three young people were in
custodial institutions at the time of the inspection. Two semi-independent units
with full-time on-site support are classified as houses of multiple occupancy
but meet the support needs of their residents very well. Young people


inspectors spoke with were happy with their accommodation but disliked the
proximity of the accommodation to a childrens home because of perceived
stigmatisation.
accommodation is insufficient to meet young peoples needs. Staff told
inspectors this means that some young people have to move on before they are
ready for more independent accommodation. Others wait too long for a place
with the right level of support. It is possible for young people to return to
accommodation where a higher level of support is provided, but this depends
on availability. Inspectors were also told that a planned reduction of staff in the
aftercare service has reduced the availability of staff to help young people
develop independence skills, although this need is identified as a key message
following a review of the pledge. The local authoritys sufficiency strategy
recognises this shortfall and its impact on care leavers. The current business
plan includes a review of aftercare support to develop independence skills, but
no improvements are yet evident.
providers. Tenancy applications are made before they are needed and then
activated when required, helping to reduce waiting times. Care leavers have
priority but not a right to a tenancy. In practice this is reported not to be
problematic. Young people can elect to have the monthly rent element of their
universal benefit paid direct to the housing provider to help with their
budgeting. Those who make mistakes such as causing damage to their
accommodation or failing to pay their rent are not deemed intentionally
homeless or criminalised. Alternative means to address this are not yet in place,
but restorative justice approaches are at an advanced stage of development.
about their entitlements. They are sure that any reasonable requests for
support will be met. Care leavers spoken with knew how much money they
would get to set up home. This is discretionary, up to a maximum of 2,000,
which is less than the nationally recommended amount of 2,000 as a minimum
grant. Arrangements to support those in higher education are made on an
individual basis. Care leavers benefit from a wide range of enrichment activities
and financial support, for example contributions towards driving lessons and
outfits for special events. However, there is limited young-person-friendly
written information about entitlements available from Oldham. Information is
not available electronically via the councils website. The current arrangement,
which depends on staff advising young people individually, is unsatisfactory
because it risks partiality. There are plans to rectify this with a dedicated area
on a new council young peoples website.
complaints have been made by care leavers in the last two years. Young people
told inspectors their workers would sort out any issues they raised. The
childrens champion scheme is being relaunched with senior council officers


acting as champions for individual young people and both senior officers and
young people spoken to were extremely positive about this. Good attention is
being paid to matching and providing training for champions. Anecdotal
examples of the mutual benefits of this scheme are described by officers, but a
more systematic evaluation over time is necessary to determine its impact.
However, supervision records mostly consist of brief factual updates with
respect to individual young people. There is little evidence that workers are
encouraged to reflect on their interventions with the young people, to revise
goals or consider how to improve outcomes for young people.
progress being made by young people, the reach of the service, or other
information that would help determine the extent to which services meet
needs. At present, information is gathered from a variety of council and partner
sources and is in different formats, which impedes its collation and analysis.
Managers are aware of the shortfalls in reliable data and there is a strong
desire for this to be improved. The quality of data is currently too variable to
confidently inform service developments and this needs rectifying to support
future commissioning decisions and continuous service improvement.


Leadership, management and
governance

Requires improvement

Summary
Oldham was rated good in its safeguarding and looked after children inspection in
has been insufficient focus on ensuring the quality of frontline practice across
childrens social care.
Senior managers demonstrate ambition and commitment to improve services for
children and young people. There are examples of strong strategic partnerships and
innovation in some areas, which have led to the development of some good quality
services.
Strategic arrangements between senior officers and elected members are good, with
positive challenging arrangements between the senior leadership team, the lead
members and other political leaders. There is a strongly voiced commitment to being
good corporate parents and both senior officers and members understand the
requirements of this role.
The quality of practice and the management oversight of work done with children
who need help and protection, children who are looked after, and care leavers is not
yet consistently good. This means that practice is not achieving improving outcomes
for too many children and young people.
Performance management and quality assurance systems are not fully developed
and are not effective in ensuring senior managers have a good enough
understanding of the quality of frontline practice.
Oldham has achieved a largely fully-staffed social care workforce against a backdrop
of fierce competition for social workers. However, the workforce strategy lacks
sufficient attention to social worker recruitment and retention and to competing
approaches from other local authorities. This inhibits its ability to retain and develop
the workforce. A high proportion of social workers are newly qualified; good
arrangements are in place to support those who are in their first year of
employment.
Oldham has responded strongly to some key areas of existing and emerging risk
such as child sexual exploitation, and the links between these and other areas of
criminality which impact directly on the safeguarding of children and young people.
Despite a strong shared commitment to improving outcomes for vulnerable children,
some areas need more attention to be good, for example the educational attainment
of children looked after and the numbers of care leavers who are in education,
training or employment.
The views of young people are taken into account well when commissioning services.


Inspection findings
services being delivered by three directorates, has had a positive impact on
establishing a broader, shared ownership and commitment to childrens
services. The combination of the roles of DCS and Director of Adult Services
into one post of Executive Director for Health and Wellbeing has been subject
to a local assurance test in March 2015, which demonstrates that measures are
in place to mitigate any risks posed by these arrangements. While the matrix
management arrangements add complexity to the structure, the shared
responsibilities have embedded the concept of children being everyones
responsibility across the council. A fortnightly childrens assurance meeting
attended by senior officers considers childrens issues to a good level of detail.
member of the Health and Wellbeing Board, but has only recently taken on
responsibility for childrens social care, having previously been the lead for adult
safeguarding and health. The relocation of health to a different portfolio will
enable the lead member to concentrate on childrens social care services better
in the future. The lead member has significant experience and a good
understanding and knowledge about safeguarding issues, particularly in respect
of child sexual exploitation, the education of children looked after, and
diversity. Weekly meetings between the lead member and the Executive
Director provide good opportunities to exchange information and provide
support and challenge. Both parties describe an effective, open and suitably
challenging relationship based on shared goals and mutual trust.
provided via the corporate safeguarding accountability meeting (CSAM). The
CSAM is attended by the LSCB and the Local Adult Safeguarding Board (LASB)
chairs, receives regular reports on services for children, in addition to those
provided to the overview and scrutiny committee, and reports to the leader of
the council and the chief executive. Both groups ensure political leaders,
including opposition members, have knowledge and understanding of
safeguarding issues, and that there are opportunities to challenge the services
being provided to children and families.
children and young people and there are examples of some strong strategic
partnership working having an impact on areas of service, for example the
continued development of the MASH and the strategic response to child sexual
exploitation.
agenda, tackling radicalisation. A regular multi-agency panel is well represented
by a wide range of appropriate agencies. The panel produced the joint
safeguarding agreements for both the LSCB and the Local Adult Safeguarding
Board (LASB) and has been engaged in raising awareness across agencies. The


number of referrals is increasing from a wider range of sources. The panel
ensures that children, young people and adults have bespoke interventions that
aim to assess and reduce the risk they may pose.
governance. There are distinctions between political, strategic and operational
roles. Effective working relationships between the chief executive, the lead
member and the DCS ensure childrens issues are given a high priority and
safeguarding issues are a standing item on the weekly executive management
team meetings. Although some officers and members are represented on
different strategic boards, there are no formal governance arrangements
between strategic boards such as the LSCB, the LASB, the Community Safety
Partnership and the Health and Wellbeing Board. It is acknowledged by the
local authority that these arrangements should be strengthened to ensure local
priorities are effectively addressed.
good representation from young people who are very active and influential
members. The debate and questions from officers and elected members
demonstrate that they are a knowledgeable and committed group of corporate
parents, although there is evidence of slow progress in some areas, with
reports to the panel being deferred several times at successive meetings.
Initiatives such as the childrens champion scheme demonstrate a commitment
to developing the role of corporate parents, although this is a relatively recent
initiative.
performance in childrens social care, but this has been impeded by significant
difficulties in extracting accurate data from the childrens electronic recording
system. Progress has been made and there is now some useful data available
for scrutiny. This has led to improvements in the timeliness of assessments and
initial conferences. However, the data presented is of limited value because it
lacks analysis, is repetitive and is limited in terms of showing trends or
providing hypotheses about unexpected performance. The local authority
acknowledges that the information presented on scorecards requires
improvement. Frontline and mid-tier social work managers cannot easily access
information relevant to their areas of responsibility to contribute to improving
the service. A new software package is currently being populated and is
intended to enable managers to interrogate team- and service-level data but
this is not yet available. Currently, performance management information at
this level is poor.
under-developed. A rudimentary spreadsheet is maintained by legal services
but this is insufficient to ensure that all children who require an intervention
under the Public Law Outline (PLO) receive one in accordance with agreements
and in a timely manner. Management oversight of this key area of practice


needs to be strengthened to ensure there is no drift and delay for children and
their permanence plans are progressing swiftly.
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and is an
effective participant in the local Family Justice Board. This is helping the local
authority achieve legal orders for children where these are necessary. Joint
work with other local authorities and the judiciary is attempting to address the
timeliness of proceedings through the court process, which is currently below
expected national standards.
developments, for example the development of the early help strategy and the
development of the special educational needs and disability (SEND)
programme. There are mechanisms to use learning and feedback from
complaints to influence practice, and examples were seen of improved practice
in the quality of direct and life story work. This is directly attributable to a
number of complaints from children about contact arrangements. The
childrens interest group reports via senior managers and attempts to ensure
those childrens views feed into service developments via the professionals who
work directly with them. However, while the group does raise issues that are
relevant and of importance to children and young people, the membership of
this group does not include young people and this is an area for development.
working in Oldham and many described good working relationships and
informal support from their managers. There is a wide range of training
available which reflects current priorities and helps social workers to meet the
needs of vulnerable children better. Training opportunities are described
positively by workers. Many workers could outline findings from serious case
reviews, confirming that messages are widely disseminated. However, not all
workers could describe what impact the findings had had on their practice.
their families is too variable. Some assessments, interventions, plans and
reviews are good or very good, but others require improvement. This variability
was seen across childrens social care services and reflected similar variability of
the management oversight of practice. Management decisions are not always
evident on childrens files and are not always effective in ensuring children and
young people receive a consistently good quality service and that plans are
progressed in a timely way.
good supervision of social workers was seen but in other cases, there is little
evidence of workers having regular formal supervision with their managers.
Staff told inspectors that their managers were readily available to them and
informal supervision and advice is a feature of the workplace. Where
supervision has taken place, the quality of the recording of this on childrens


files was often poor, with little evidence of detailed reflection or the rationale
underpinning decisions. The supervision policy for social work staff, updated in
April 2015, now includes specific requirements for social workers including an
expectation of reflective supervision but this is not yet embedded across the
service. More robust implementation is required to rectify current custom and
practice.
case files and a policy specifies that 10 case audits should be completed each
quarter. On cases seen that have been audited, appropriate strengths and
weaknesses are identified. Recommendations for remedial actions are clear and
these have led to many deficits in recording and practice being addressed.
However, in a minority of cases, some recommendations have not been
followed through, and this needs more robust oversight to ensure the audit
process is effective. The audits have not been instrumental in demonstrating
improved good practice across all of the service. More work is needed to ensure
that case auditing embeds improvements.
entirety of their role, for example monitoring the progress of children, speaking
with children before reviews, and improving the attendance of children at
conferences. Senior managers have responded to the rising demands on the
service by recently increasing capacity, and these are key priorities for the
service. It is expected that the IRO service will increase its independent scrutiny
and challenge. At the present time, this remains under-developed.
recruitment and retention of social workers. The challenges and current
approaches are set out in a recently produced childrens social care workforce
development action plan. Good arrangements are in place to support social
workers at the earliest stages and there is a revised career development
pathway for them. However, currently only 32% of social workers are level 3
(at least two years post-qualified) against a target of 40%. The turnover of
staff has been mitigated by successful recruitment campaigns which have kept
vacancy rates relatively low. However, the profile of the workforce is changing,
with a steadily increasing proportion being newly qualified social workers. The
local authority has begun to forward-plan, taking into account other pressures
such as competition from nearby authorities offering apparently better
employment conditions. However, a clear strategy to offset risk should the
recruitment climate change is not yet in place, leaving the local authority
potentially vulnerable and reactive to changes in the employment market.
manageable caseloads. It is used well in most teams. However, information
that could be extracted from the workload management system is not being
used to analyse and plan for pressures in specific areas of service or with
specific groups. Safeguarding services are particularly vulnerable as over 40%
of the 54 full-time equivalent social worker posts are filled by newly qualified


workers and more careful attention is required to ensure that less experienced
staff have sufficient supervision and support and can provide good quality help
for children on their caseloads.
about children looked after and the changing ethnic profile of the borough, and
uses this information to inform the commissioning of appropriate services and
to respond to emerging needs. The work undertaken to create a streamlined
CAMHS service demonstrates positive partnership working to use budgets to
best effect to commission a range of services across all levels of need, although
the process has been lengthy. Other examples of refocusing existing resources
to improve their impact include changing the function of a childrens home into
an adolescent support unit providing outreach and some residential provision,
and the development of a therapeutic in-house fostering scheme. Both of these
initiatives are too recent to demonstrate impact, but they illustrate the local
authoritys capacity to re-model resources in response to changes in demand.
The views of young people have been taken into account well when
commissioning services. However, there is no over-arching joint strategic needs
assessment that incorporates the needs of all children, young people and their
families in the borough and which can inform fully cohesive joint
commissioning. This is a shortfall.
placements for most looked after children, particularly with regard to foster
home places. This has resulted in low numbers of children living more than 20
miles away from their communities. The current fostering sufficiency and
retention strategy acknowledges future challenges and sets suitable objectives
and targets to increase provision through a range of methods. There is a lack of
choice of suitable accommodation for care leavers, and this has been identified
as an area for development.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
require improvement.
A Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) requires improvement if it does not
yet demonstrate the characteristics of good.

Executive summary
The governance and structure of the LSCB meets its statutory requirements. It is
independently chaired and has appropriate agency membership. Regular meetings
are held between the independent chair of the LSCB and the Director of Childrens
Services (DCS) to facilitate accountability. These meetings should be minuted to
ensure transparency and provide an audit trail. The board monitors its impact via a
challenge log but this requires further development and more robust follow-up to
demonstrate good impact.
The board scrutinises frontline performance where data is available to enable this to
occur. Good efforts are underway to improve the quality of performance data so that
the rigour of the boards scrutiny of frontline practice across all partner agencies is
improved; this is not sufficiently well developed yet.
The boards review of early help services in Oldham was inclusive and wide-ranging.
This has resulted in a better coordinated and coherent early help offer for children
and families, supported by clear threshold guidance. The guidance is strengthened
by the inclusion of clear escalation arrangements which are reported on positively by
partner agencies.
The annual report includes appropriate information about key services such as
arrangements to manage adults who may pose a risk to children and analysis and
findings of the child death overview panel. It provides an accurate overview of
performance in childrens social care, but there is insufficient analysis of partner
agencies performance. The LSCB business plan was only partially complete at the
time of the inspection. Its priorities reflect the needs of the most vulnerable well but
it is awaiting clear outcome-focused targets that can be measured to determine
whether services have improved the outcomes for children and young people.
The board delivers a wide range of training which is readily available to partner
agencies and is appropriate to the needs of children and families. Individual training
and awareness-raising events are evaluated for impact upon delivery, but there is
more to do to evaluate the impact of training as a whole and establish the difference


it makes to frontline practice.
Quality assurance commissioned by the board has appropriately identified strengths
and weaknesses in key areas of practice such as the support available to children in
need. This has had a positive impact on practice but the board needs to ensure that
follow-up actions are robust and agencies are held to account for improvements
required. Agencies report self-assessments of safeguarding standards in their
organisations but more supporting evidence is required to provide assurance.
The boards sub-groups have developed and driven many important areas of practice
such as co-ordinating efforts to tackle child sexual exploitation, and have been
effective in identifying and lobbying for services to address the challenge of
consanguinity in the borough.
The boards re-organisation has been slow to come to fruition and there has been a
lengthy consultation period. However, partners are positive about the proposals and
expect future arrangements to accelerate progress in achieving the boards priorities.
It is too early to see the impact of this.

Recommendations
quality of frontline practice, delivered to children and young people, in all
partner agencies.
includes both narrative and analysis and is explicit about whether aspects of
performance are improving or deteriorating. Data should be sufficient to enable
partners to challenge and hold each other to account.
partner agencies, should be supported by evidence so the board is assured of
the quality of safeguarding practice across the partnership.
with statutory guidance.
detailed monitoring and analysis to ensure it is meeting partner agencies
training needs and is responsive to changing demands.
outcomes sought for children and young people, including how these will be
measured.


DCS and the independent chair of the LSCB.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
independently chaired and has appropriate agency membership. The LSCB has
adopted the Greater Manchester learning and improvement framework that
includes procedures regarding the initiation of serious case reviews (SCRs),
multi-agency and individual agency reviews. Oldham adopts the Greater
Manchester child protection policies and procedures, which are sufficiently
detailed, meet requirements and are available on the LSCB website. Additional
guidance on Oldham-specific arrangements is also available.
development work over that period to review and revise the structure and
functioning of the board. The chair has also set strategic priorities in line with
childrens identified needs in the borough. Revised arrangements are due to be
implemented in July 2015. Although this has been a lengthy process and may
have contributed to slower progress in some areas, partner agencies are
positive about the consultation process and are confident that the revisions will
result in a more effective board. Revisions allow the continuation of seven subgroups covering the boards core functions, such as policies and procedures,
the child death overview panel (CDOP) and performance. An additional six
priority issues groups have been established to take forward key areas of
development. These priorities include early help, child sexual exploitation,
children who go missing, neglect and special education needs and disability
(SEND) issues. Greater clarity is required regarding the terms of reference of
the priority issues groups to ensure their work and achievements are aligned
with not only the boards strategic priorities, but also the priorities of the Health
and Wellbeing Board and the Community Safety Partnership.
CDOP and local authority designated officer (LADO) annual reports. These are
presented and discussed at the board and priorities identified within the reports
are appropriately included in the boards business plan.
and update of the threshold document for partner agencies. This is valued by
partners who described it as clear and helpful. Guidance now includes a clearer
escalation arrangement so that partner agencies who feel that a child or family
has not had a response appropriate to their needs are able trigger a prompt
review of decision-making. The national requirement for the local authority to
develop a protocol for assessment with partners, and for this to be approved by
the LSCB and published, has not been met. As a result, although partner
agencies are clearer about thresholds and there has been an increase in issues
being appropriately escalated where disagreements have taken place, there is


not a shared understanding of the contributions that agencies should make to
assessments and how these will be undertaken.
completed during the previous year in some detail and does evidence some
lessons learned from audits, SCRs and the CDOP. The report outlines
performance in key aspects of childrens services such as safeguarding and
services for children looked after, but does not contain enough analysis of
frontline practice across all partner agencies. This is a key priority for the board.
reflect those identified by other key strategic groups such as the Health and
Wellbeing Board. It sets out the priorities for areas of work to be undertaken by
the sub-groups, but more work is required to make it clear what outcomes are
being sought for young people, and how they will be measured. Until this is in
place, it is unclear how the board will be able to determine what, if any,
influence its actions are having. This shortfall will reduce its ability to evaluate
and report on its own effectiveness. The board also needs to ensure that all the
recommendations of the last annual report have been followed through or
discontinued and to be clear about rationale and progress on each.
Board and the Community Safety Partnership are in place but require
strengthening to confirm responsibilities, accountabilities, reporting
arrangements and mutual impact of refreshed priorities. While there are some
links through shared membership of different boards, strengthened governance
would benefit all the strategic partnerships and help avoid duplication or gaps
in effort.
its audit and scrutiny sub-group so it is too early to see any impact from this.
The DCS has regular meetings and discussion with the independent chair of
LSCB but minutes are not taken. As a result, there is no written record of any
challenge or of the parties holding each other to account. This is acknowledged
as an area for development.
as a significant issue in the borough. The LSCB has lobbied effectively for
resources to address this. A recent agreement from the clinical commissioning
group to fund a specialist nursing post to increase awareness of the risks of
marrying close relatives has now been agreed. The post holder will also develop
appropriate services such as genetic counselling as part of this role. This is a
good example of the LSCB having an impact on commissioning on an issue that
is very significant for some communities in Oldham.
training which is delivered by enthusiastic and committed staff. It is delivered in
a range of ways to maximise participation. There are some examples of


innovative developments in respect of e-safety and letting children be children.
Feedback from participants on the impact of training helps to shape the quality
and delivery of individual courses well. However, there is no system to evaluate
how training is influencing or improving practice across the partnership. As a
result, the board cannot determine if the full range of development and training
opportunities is having the desired impact on practice across all partner
agencies.
but recognises that it should be extended to partner agencies in equivalent
detail. It has adopted the Greater Manchester performance data framework,
which is detailed but requires data from partner agencies; this has been slow to
be received. A fully populated dataset has not yet been achieved although the
board continues to seek data on specific issues pending this going live. In the
interim, it scrutinises exceptional data. In quarter 4 of 201415, the board
scrutinised, for example, the percentage of children missing who had an
independent return interview within 72 hours of their return, the percentage of
initial child protection conferences undertaken within expected timescales and
repeat referrals to childrens social care. The board is appropriately
concentrating on those areas of greatest concern, but in some cases where
performance has been weak over time, such as the completion of return
interviews for missing children, this has only relatively recently been identified
as a priority requiring further enquiry and challenge. The sub-group responsible
for overseeing strategic approaches to tackling child sexual exploitation and
children who go missing is fully aware of performance to date and the new
chair is aware of the challenge and improvements required for all partners.
the board within the last 12 months. These have been independent and
thorough, with the outcomes and learning being reported to the board. Actions
identified as a result of audits have not been routinely and effectively followed
up to ensure that shortfalls identified have been addressed and practice has
improved as a result. The board does not have an agreed forward programme
to undertake regular multi-agency audits of casework by partner agencies and
this is an area for development which would increase partner agencies
understanding of each others services and operational contexts.
acknowledges that these did not provide sufficient supporting evidence for the
self-assessed judgements made. A revised method of undertaking section 11
audits is in progress, which will ensure agencies provide evidence that
triangulates the self-assessed position. This will provide a more robust
assurance of the quality of safeguarding practice in Oldham.
undertake a SCR. Five SCRs have been commissioned during 201415, three of
which are now completed. All have resulted in good, detailed action plans that
are based on the learning identified. There is evidence of the recommendations


being acted upon, for example by awareness-raising or training on issues.
Recommendations have also impacted on frontline practice, such as health
visiting staff now using genograms to good effect. The impact of learning from
SCRs would be strengthened by more robust oversight and monitoring by the
board to ensure the swifter implementation of actions.
has a sophisticated and detailed understanding of the issues that underpin
these areas of concern for children. Partner agencies work well together and
demonstrate good commitment to this area of work. Although services to
address child sexual exploitation have been in place for some time in Oldham,
there is no sense of services or the sub-group standing still and arrangements
have continued to develop over the last 12 months. Feedback from an
independent audit commissioned in late 2014 has resulted in the Phoenix team
being given additional capacity to improve the social work service to children
and young people and improve the links with early help. However, the feedback
given from the Ofsted thematic inspection regarding the variable quality of
frontline practice with young people at risk of child sexual exploitation has not
been the subject of further analysis and is an area that requires further
scrutiny. The paucity of boys and young men identified as at risk of child sexual
exploitation is being raised at a strategic level. The sub-group is aware there is
likely to be unidentified risk and that there is a need to ensure frontline
practitioners are sufficiently skilled at identifying and responding to boys and
young men at risk.
stage of development compared with arrangements to tackle child sexual
exploitation but arrangements continue to improve. Good awareness-raising
across the partnership has been undertaken. The service to provide return
interviews was re-commissioned in April 2015. However, the sub-group and the
board were slow to respond and did not raise enough challenge in response to
evidence of shortfalls in return home interviews during the year to April 2015.
Concerns were expressed but this did not result in immediate remedial action
being taken. The current service is reporting improving reach and timeliness of
interviews.
ensure it can monitor the progress of the work of all of its sub-groups and hold
them to account for it. The sub-groups are not required to provide frequent
written reports of progress to the board. While there is a great deal of very
positive work being undertaken by the sub-groups, their progress and impact is
variable and is not being driven consistently and effectively by the board.
strategic priorities. There is good commitment to partnership working from key
statutory agencies as well as good engagement with the voluntary sector. The
boards priorities are appropriately matched to the identified needs of children
and young people in the borough. It is acknowledged that although there have


been positive developments in the boards impact and structure, the board is
still evolving and developing, and much of the planned change has yet to be
implemented.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people it is trying to help, protect
and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Sheena Doyle HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Mike Ferguson HMI
Team inspectors: Neil Penswick HMI, Donna Marriot HMI, Paula Thomson-Jones HMI,
Ros Walker AI, Judith Nelson AI, Cath McEvoy HMI, Louise Warren HMI and Shahram
Safavi HMI
Senior data analysts: Hywel Benbow and Pete McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams, Senior HMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


