Oxfordshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 29 April 2014  21 May 2014
Report published: 30 June 2014
The overall judgement is good.
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.


Good
Good


Good


Good


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is
good.
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in
place to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents
Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because

When agencies are concerned about children, they know how to get the right
level of help for them. Thresholds for the different levels of help, including
social care, are clear and understood by professionals.


Agencies work well together. Early help services are well coordinated and
have clear thresholds for support. The Troubled Families programme, Thriving
Families, is well targeted and responsive, with good take-up by those families
in most need. When children are referred to childrens social care they almost
always receive a prompt response and the right help. The large majority of
social work assessments are good. Children are always seen and asked about
their life and what they need to improve it. Assessments analyse risk carefully
and what needs to be done to reduce it. Hospital-based social workers
complete good assessments that result in effective planning and discharge
arrangements for newborn babies who may be in need of help or protection.


The large majority of child protection enquiries are carefully planned by
childrens social care with the police and other agencies and investigated
thoroughly. Social work action to protect children when they need it is
decisive and proportionate.


Consultation and advice are readily available to professionals who are
concerned about possible child sexual exploitation. The Kingfisher team
provides a consistent service for children identified as at risk of sexual
exploitation. Their work is clearly focused on reducing risks as well as on
meeting childrens and young peoples wider needs.


A stable workforce in childrens social care means that most children
experience consistency of social worker and say they have a significant,
sustained relationship with them.


Decisions about whether children should become or remain looked after are
timely and based on evidence about the childs needs. When necessary, care
proceedings are initiated quickly to ensure that children are not exposed to
harm for extended periods.


The Family Placement Support Service is a particular strength. It works
effectively with families to prevent the need for children to become looked
after. It also supports families when a child returns home after being looked
after.


Long-term planning to secure stable futures for children is given a high
priority. The search for suitable alternative families starts at the earliest


possible stage. The contribution made by the adoption service is good. The
number of children placed for adoption has increased over the last two years
and includes improved adoption rates for older children.

Young people are well supported when they leave care. The quality of most
pathway plans is good and, whilst some lack detail, most reflect clear and
timely actions to help young people make the transition to independence.
Most care leavers feel well supported by their social workers and describe
effective and consistent relationships that enable them to develop trusting
relationships.

remain with their carers beyond the age of 18. This is bringing demonstrable
improvements to the life chances of most care leavers, for example in
increased emotional stability as well as a secure base while in education.
and elected members. The local authority knows its strengths and
weaknesses well. Strategic priorities are identified and informed by feedback
from children, young people, parents, carers and staff. Leadership is strong
and effective and services make a demonstrable difference in improving the
life chances of some of the most vulnerable children in Oxfordshire.
people in Oxfordshire and have prioritised continued investment, for example
in additional social worker and team manager posts. They hold senior officers
to account for the quality of services.
effectively to inform change and drive improvement. This learning culture is
further supported by the effective identification and dissemination of lessons
from audits and serious case reviews.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Areas for Improvement
procedures and ensure that children are not unnecessarily subject to both
processes.
be placed in or near their own communities unless there is a specific need for
a placement further afield.
whom the plan is a permanent alternative family, and not just those moving
towards adoption.
assessments are completed and presented to fostering panel within the
required timescales.
school leaders at all stages of education so that the attainment of looked after
children improves to at least the expected level for their age.
engage in education, training or employment that is commensurate with their
ability and potential.
recorded.
Oxfordshire Safeguarding Children Board (OSCB) to ensure a robust
framework for safeguarding children and young people.
child protection service are able to have an independent advocate to
represent their views if they wish.
their age so that they understand how to complain.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one contracted inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett HMI
Team inspectors: Fiona Millns HMI, Sean Tarpey HMI, Pauline Turner HMI, Aelwyn
Pugh HMI, Stephanie Murray HMI, Paul Johnston



Information about this local authority area
Children living in this area


Approximately 138,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years
live in Oxfordshire. This is 21.1% of the total population in the area.



Approximately 12.7% of the local authoritys children under 16 are living in
poverty.



The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%).



Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 13.5% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.



The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British (5.8%) and people from Mixed/Multiple Ethnic groups
(4.9%).



The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 14%).



Children of non-white ethnicity follow the same pattern of distribution in the
county as adults, predominantly living in Oxford City and Banbury. At ward
level, the highest proportion of non-white ethnicity among children under 18
was 58% in Cowley Marsh in Oxford City.

Child protection in this area


At 31 March 2014, 3,151 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from



At 31 March 2014, 512 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 430 at 31 March 2013.



At 31 March 2013, 34 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is a decrease from 37 at 31 March 2012 (the 2014 submission is not yet
available).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local invalidated data where this was available.


Children looked after in this area


At 31 March 2014, 467 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 33.7 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 416 (30.0 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2013. Of this number:
authority area
authority area
area



In the last 12 months:
 there have been 44 adoptions
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
 the number of children and young people who have ceased to be
looked after and are now living in houses of multiple occupation is
not available at this time.

Other Ofsted inspections




The local authority operates 2 childrens homes. Both were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.



The previous inspection of Oxfordshires safeguarding arrangements /
arrangements for the protection of children was in March 2011. The local
authority was judged to be Grade 2 (Good).



The previous inspection of Oxfordshires services for looked after children was
in March 2011. The local authority was judged to be Grade 2 (Good).

These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


Other information about this area


The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since October 2011 in an
interim capacity and April 2012 as substantive.



The interim chair of the LSCB has been in post since October 2013.



In May 2013, following a joint police and local authority investigation in
Oxfordshire, seven men were convicted of child sexual exploitation. The OSCB
initiated a serious case review but has not yet completed its investigations. In
response to the investigation, and prior to the convictions, the local authority
and its partners, including police, health and district councils, worked
collaboratively to provide services to protect and support vulnerable children
and young people. This has included setting up the dedicated Kingfisher MultiAgency Team in November 2012, and creating a wider awareness about young
people who are victims of sexual exploitation. Extensive training for staff across
the partnerships has been delivered and the local authority recently hosted a
national conference on child sexual exploitation.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good
what needs to change to improve a childs life. These also inform subsequent
intervention, which is supported by regular team around the child meetings
to monitor progress. The Thriving Families scheme is well focused on those
most in need of support. It is intensive, well organised and cost-effective, and
has led to clear improvements in the lives of particular families.
help stages. This includes help for children and young people in those families
where there is drug and alcohol misuse by parents or carers. EIS help
continues to be available if cases escalate to childrens social care. It also
supports an increasing number of children and families when social care
intervention ends. This helps to reduce the risk of concerns re-emerging. The
EIS introduced the Family Star model in January 2014. This is beginning to
provide evidence that early help is making a difference and improving
outcomes for children.
applied across the partnership. Excellent arrangements are in place to ensure
that social work advice is available to support professionals from partner
agencies. Locality senior practitioners and social workers based across all
Childrens Social Care teams including the hospital provide prompt advice and
consultation to a wide range of professionals about actions they should take
on cases. Social workers are linked to all childrens centres and schools and
provide regular formal consultation sessions. Advice is clearly recorded and
reviewed by the locality senior practitioner and is of sound quality. This is an
area of particularly good practice.
a prompt and proportionate response from childrens social care. This includes
when concerns arise out of normal office hours. Good arrangements are in
place with the police to undertake child protection investigations where there
is a risk of significant harm. Minutes of strategy discussions to plan and
coordinate investigations include clear details of the next steps to be taken.
Inspectors found no cases where children were left at risk.
excellent arrangements to secure informed consent from families in need of
early help and lower level interventions from childrens social care.
protective factors well and provide a robust analysis. They include a number
of key elements that combine to produce a good understanding of the childs


experience. For example, they are informed by chronologies and so take into
account historical factors when considering current needs and risks. Children
are routinely involved in assessments and their experiences are central to
them. The voice of the child is well reflected in the large majority of
assessments. Assessments include consideration of fathers, even when they
are absent. Social workers use a specific tool to assess the nature and impact
of neglect on children. This enables them to tailor interventions to meet the
particular needs of these children and to help them overcome the harm they
have suffered. Overall, assessments provide a good platform for planning and
intervention. However, they do not routinely consider childrens identity needs
fully, for example in relation to ethnicity, and this limits their value in some
respects.
Assessments are comprehensive and lead to the development of wellinformed child protection and child in need plans. These are mostly outcomefocused, with specific actions to reduce risk and meet needs. More recent
child protection plans make it clear to parents what they have to change and
how they will be supported in doing so. This is reinforced by child protection
conference chairs, who ensure that parents understand plans before they
leave conferences. Parents told inspectors that they are aware of professional
expectations of them.
effective in monitoring the progress of families where children are on a child
protection plan and in holding parents and professionals to account. In the
majority of cases, core groups are instrumental in driving effective action to
progress plans swiftly, leading to improved or improving outcomes for
children. Arrangements for considering child protection issues for children
with disabilities are effective, with co-working arrangements in place between
the assessment teams and disability social workers. This ensures that the
protection needs of the child are fully considered as well as those relating to
their disability.
They are increasingly valuable in ensuring that childrens needs are met. They
are used well to shape continuing support for children and families who
previously had child protection plans. This helps families to sustain the
positive changes they have made. However, a small minority of child
protection plans were over-complicated and did not enable parents to
understand the changes they needed to make.
looked after arrangements. This means that some parents and children
unnecessarily experience additional meetings and processes. The local
authority has recognised this and is reviewing all these cases to ensure this
issue is rectified.


need to develop more outcome-focused protection plans. Their quality
assurance function is not yet fully developed, though plans are in place to
develop this aspect of their role.
Oxfordshire. This is due in part to improvements in the targeting of
intervention, better decision-making and more robust management oversight.
Core group meetings take place regularly, and there is evidence that most are
effective in developing the outline protection plan into an effective working
tool and in monitoring progress.
records. It is effective in providing both quality assurance and clear direction
to work done with children and families. Staff report that they are well
supported by managers.
workers. Social workers know their children well and it is clear that they have
meaningful discussions with them about their experiences and advocate well
for them. Independent advocacy services are not frequently used by young
people. The local authority recognises the need to promote these services
more effectively.
people who have suffered or are at risk of child sexual exploitation (CSE), is
of high quality. It focuses both on reducing risks and meeting wider needs for
young people, as well as providing good consideration of the young persons
holistic needs. Large numbers of professionals have been effectively trained to
identify potential indicators of child sexual exploitation. The consistently high
use of a child sexual exploitation screening tool by professionals who are
concerned about possible CSE is leading to more young people being helped
earlier. The Kingfisher team provides good quality consultation and advice to
a wide range of professionals on child sexual exploitation. Excellent
awareness-raising activity takes place with young people on a continual cycle
and is now taking place with parents and carers.
home and care. The police undertake a safe and well visit when children
return home and provide very prompt reports to the local authority. Social
workers visit promptly after each missing episode of a child known to the
service. They complete a return interview with the young person to
understand the reasons for the missing episode. All missing episodes are
effectively recorded and risk assessed, with appropriate plans to reduce the
risk of future missing episodes. The authority has effective systems for
identifying, monitoring and responding to those children who are missing from
education and those who are educated at home. Officers provide support and,


where necessary, challenge to ensure the quality of the education provided in
this way.
year-olds who become homeless. The local authority takes good steps to
identify appropriate housing for young people, including in emergencies.
Continuing support is available to young people through children in need
plans when they choose not to become looked after. Two young people were
in temporary bed and breakfast accommodation at the time of the inspection.
Their situations have been fully risk assessed and appropriate action is being
taken to secure more permanent accommodation.
raising work across Oxfordshire, and particularly with local language schools,
has been successful in increasing the number of referrals overall.
and responding to allegations of abuse or mistreatment of children by
professionals and carers are effective. Allegations are investigated thoroughly
to ensure that risk to children is identified and prompt actions taken to reduce
it.
police officer and well attended by relevant partner agencies. This process
increases the protection of children and young people who are at risk of harm
caused by domestic abuse. Referrals to MARAC are appropriate and timely.
Similarly, multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) demonstrate
a coordinated multi-agency response and shared understanding that reduces
risk to children.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
well supported to remain with their families where this is appropriate.
managers and are proportionate and timely. The Public Law Outline is well
understood and legal advice is clear. Decisions made about thresholds for
proceedings take account of family history, the motivation of parents to
change and the impact of adult need and behaviour on children.
average timescale is 27 weeks, which is better than the national average.
While the quality of assessments and reports is variable, most are good.
Social workers thoroughly explore all support options to help birth families
care for their children safely. Where this is not possible, they give a high
priority to securing alternative permananent arrangements. Social workers
speak authoritatively and warmly about children and young people who are


looked after. They understand their histories, work hard to make sure they
live within homes that meet their needs and think carefully about their long
term outcomes. The vast majority of young people who spoke to inspectors
made positive comments about their social workers and one said, My social
worker never left me, she stayed by my side.
thriving in their current placement, with improved outcomes in all or most
areas of their lives. Most children looked after experience great stability in
their short- and long-term placements. The vast majority of children placed
out of area are well supported and are not adversely affected by the fact they
do not live in Oxford.
social workers. However, the ability of young people and their social workers
to make and sustain meaningful relationships is reduced in a small minority of
cases where visits take place every three months. Whilst this visiting pattern
had been agreed by the child, this is not a sufficient monitoring frequency.
within Oxfordshires ATTACH Team (Attaining Therapeutic Attachments for
Children) provide effective therapeutic intervention to children. This work has
been successful in reducing the number of children entering the care system
as well as preventing placement breakdown
scrutiny of care plans for looked after children and young people. They
challenge decisions and plans effectively where appropriate and stay in touch
with young people, particularly during times of change or uncertainty.
Although they routinely see children a few days before their review, and
clearly know them well, they do not consistently have face-to-face contact
with young people between their reviews.
approved has increased. Despite this recent increase in approvals, there is still
a shortage of carers for older teenagers and children requiring long-term
care. This is having an adverse impact on the local authoritys ability to match
children and young people immediately to appropriate in-house placements.
therapeutic placements to children and young people aged 3 to 16, with 58
children being placed to date. Children placed within the programme benefit
from the involvement of a strong and responsive team of professionals,
leading to a better understanding of their needs. Targeted therapeutic
intervention is making a difference to the lives and futures of most children
and young people seen. The programme has seen positive outcomes for
children including their return to their family, adoption and permanent
placements under Special Guardianship Orders.


other connected persons when thinking about long-term options for children
of all ages. However, social workers are not consistently ensuring that friends
and family assessments are completed and presented to fostering panel
within the required 16 weeks and therefore unnecessary delay has occurred in
a minority of cases.
social workers have explained to them clearly the reasons. Social workers
routinely help children to make sense of what is happening to them.
Inspectors saw examples of social workers using play with trains on a track to
help children understand their journey towards a forever family. Older looked
after young people reported to inspectors that their social workers had really
helped them to understand their lives so far. Children with a plan for adoption
are routinely engaged in life story work, but for children with plans for other
forms of permanent alternative family it is not always done early enough. The
vast majority of care plans and reviews are up to date and comprehensive.
Most plans reflect clear arrangements for looked after children, as well as the
views and wishes of the child or young person. Educational progress is
consistently explored, with recognition of the young persons progress and
achievements, together with targeted actions to address any concerns about
attendance, behaviour or attainment.
are encouraged to be involved and in the vast majority of cases children
participate fully in the discussion and planning stages. The needs of young
people are well reflected on written records, with important events,
achievements and challenges all given equal emphasis.
routinely notify looked after childrens nurses of new admissions to care. They
arrange initial assessments within two days and this ensures that childrens
health needs are understood early. Strength and Difficulties Questionnaires
(SDQs) are completed routinely for all looked after children by their carers as
part of the annual health check undertaken by the looked after children
nurses. The results of these questionnaires enable health professionals to
identify individual needs and ensure advice and support is effectively targeted
to meet this need.
well supported by the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS).
A pre-CAMHS service offers a single point of entry and looked after children
are prioritised through direct referral and effective triage processes. CAMHS
services are further strengthened through the provision of an outreach
support and crisis assessment team (OSCA). This service provides good
support for children living out of area and within a two hour drive of Oxford.
To ensure that looked after children and young people are receiving health
services that meet their specific needs, the designated doctor undertakes


regular visits to those children with high risk, complex needs who live in
specialist placements.
for young people aged up to 19 years, including looked after children. The
service also offers support to those affected by a parents or family members
substance misuse. There is an increasing number of looked after young
people accessing support from this early intervention service and this has led
to improved emotional stability in most cases. Offending rates among looked
after children are low at 3.6%. When children go missing from care there is a
well-defined reporting process which means that the social worker, team
manager and IRO are immediately informed. Return interviews are timely and
include thoughtful discussions with young people about why they went
missing and what they did when they were away from their placement.
pursue leisure activities. Looked after children receive leisure passes giving
free entry to some leisure facilities within Oxford. The local authority
organises innovative events for its children. For example a ball was attended
by 100 looked after children and care leavers, and young people spoken to as
part of the inspection report that this was a great success.
group of young people who are making a tangible difference to the
experiences of all children who are looked after in Oxfordshire. For example,
the CICC has effectively reviewed the Pledge as well as reviewed strategies to
ensure children placed out of area are well included in both events and
communication processes. Their views are well considered by senior
managers. The group is helping the local authority to understand what makes
a good social worker, and is assisting it in recruiting those who are most likely
to fit this profile.
helped to develop skills and expertise through a range of training
opportunities. While formal supervision is of good quality, records suggest
that it is not always frequent enough.
Education Plan (PEP). These plans are reviewed regularly and focus on their
attainment and progress, as well as their personal, social and emotional
development. However, they do not always set out actions and success
criteria clearly enough. All the plans showed that pupil premium funding was
being used appropriately but none of them included success criteria to
measure the impact of this investment on the childrens attainment and
progress.
relationships with schools and to challenge as well as support them. There is


evidence that the virtual school is engaged in children looked after reviews
and their contribution is leading to detailed and helpful discussions and plans
relating to children and young peoples attendance, attainment and goals.
result of daily monitoring of those placed outside Oxfordshire, as well as
within the authority. Those with high absence rates receive a range of
additional support, including a programme to help them re-engage with
education. A small minority of looked after children attend schools that are
less than good. Where a school has been judged inadequate, education
officers closely monitor education arrangements and scrutinise impact on
individual looked after children.
permanently excluded from school. Whilst the rate of fixed-term exclusions is
improving, it remains worse than for all looked after children nationally. The
authority has identified schools where the rate of multiple exclusions is very
high and has worked to help them improve the situation, for example by
revising the care plans for children.
pupils in the county and nationally. The proportion of looked after children
who make expected progress in mathematics and reading is higher than for
all pupils nationally and locally but the proportion exceeding expectations is
below average. Overall, the educational attainment of looked after children in
Oxfordshire does not indicate sufficient aspiration for them by the local
authority and its partners.
The graded judgment for adoption performance is good.
timeliness. It uses the National Register to identify potential placements and
has increased the number of family finding staff. It has a knowledgeable,
committed and enthusiastic workforce. These factors contribute to good
outcomes for children.
The drive to increase the number of adoptive placements has proved
effective. In 20132014, Adoption Orders were made for 44 children. This is
an increase of 38% on the previous year. The local authority has identified
the need to increase the number of adoptions of children over 5 years and, as
a result of effective targeting and recruitment, 13 adoptive placements were
made in 20132014 for children aged 5 years and over.
monitored, and the reasons understood. Most such cases are of children with
particularly complex needs. The local authority prioritises the need to find the


right placement for children with complex needs even when this impacts upon
overall timeliness statistics.
helping to ensure that children are placed with adopters more quickly. The
Adoption Scorecard shows that Oxfordshire is performing well, achieving an
average of 450 days from the time a child enters care to being placed with an
adoptive family. This is 30% better than the national average. The time
between receiving the placement order and deciding on a match is 114 days,
which is 45% better than the national average. In 20122013 the number of
placement disruptions prior to the final adoption order being made was very
small.
work teams. These are routinely attended by social workers and adoption
team staff. Legal support, IRO input, and other contributions are provided
where required. The key purpose of the meetings is to identify and begin to
track prospective adoption cases at an early stage. They ensure that in most
cases decisions to begin the process of family finding for a child are taken
promptly.
work, and there is some use of fostering to adopt and parallel planning,
neither approach is fully embedded. As a result, a small number of children
experience delay in achieving permanence. However action is now being
taken to implement more effective parallel planning arrangements where this
is deemed to be in the best interests of children.
are good. Existing adopters are involved in preparation training for future
adopters. This work has enabled potential adopters to understand better the
implications of adopting sibling groups. As a result, more sibling groups have
been adopted over the past year. In addition, this work has been particularly
effective in leading to a small increase in adoptions of children with complex
needs.
experience to undertake their role effectively. They all understand the need to
ensure that they are not involved in making decisions about cases for which
they have direct accountability. The independent adoption panel chair services
three Panels, each of which has its own vice-chair. This ensures consistency
in relation to both process and decision-making. Panels are always quorate,
and can be quickly convened when urgent decisions are required, for example
to meet legal deadlines. This flexibility contributes to the avoidance of delay
for children.
quality. Training for panel members is regular and relevant. Recent training


events have involved adopters describing the process to panel members from
their perspective and discussions on the issue of diversity.
Management information on adoption is prepared every six months for
discussion by the senior management team, ensuring that the local authority
has an effective managerial overview of the service provided.
workers whose specialism is providing support to adoptive parents. Parenting
courses are provided and adopters are able to access some of the courses run
by the learning and development team. Effective support is also provided by
the ATTACH team through specialist therapeutic interventions.
receive newsletters and information. The quarterly Oxfordshire Adoption
Support Newsletter is a good source of professionally produced material for
adopters. This includes information about legislative changes, training and
support opportunities and events aimed at assisting adopters to form their
own networks.
more experienced adopters who have been trained to offer one-to-one
support. This ensures that adopters are well supported and their expectations
are clear, and helps limit the number of placement breakdowns.
process of adoption and beyond. A dedicated worker, independent of the
decision-making processes for adoption, has initiated a group for birth
mothers whose children have been adopted, and is in the process of setting
up a similar group for birth grandparents.
The graded judgement for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
their local community. They feel well supported by their social workers and
personal advisers, who are good at helping them become independent.
Examples of this include financial advice, cooking and healthy eating.
recording is up to date and demonstrates regular and effective work with care
leavers. There is a clear focus in pathway plans on preparation for
independence. All plans include clear evidence of management oversight.
They clearly identify the specific needs of the young person, including contact
arrangements with family and friends, issues with regard to identity and,
where necessary, health and safety.


However, the frequency of planned contacts with care leavers was often set
at three monthly. While this minimum frequency is often amended in light of
emerging needs, a small minority of care leavers dont see their social worker
or personal adviser as often as they would wish. This reduces the scope for
early help in any problems that may arise.
undue pressure is not placed upon them to move before they are ready. It
also enables them to make the transition to further or higher education,
employment and training from a stable home life, and this increases the
chances of success.
accommodation at the time of the inspection. These are cases where the
young people have refused to accept alternative accommodation offered. The
local authority has completed comprehensive risk assessments to minimise
the adverse effect of this accommodation. Management scrutiny of the
welfare of these young people is frequent and challenging and ensures that
suitable alternatives are actively sought.
children. An independent provider has been commissioned to provide semiindependent accommodation specifically for unaccompanied asylum seekers
and high quality support is provided in relation to their legal status,
communication and other issues.
accommodation for care leavers, for example supported lodgings schemes. All
contracts now include a 12-week notice period so that, in all but the most
serious of situations, sufficient time is made available to allow for negotiation
with the young person and the provider and, when required, for an alternative
plan to be put in place. This ensures that the number of placement
disruptions is minimised.
through the pathway plan. All care leavers have a health passport. Care
leavers report that their health is well promoted and they are encouraged to
live a healthy lifestyle. Most care leavers know how to access their health
records should they wish to do so.
training (NEET) has increased and is significantly higher than the proportion
for all young people in Oxfordshire. There are currently 70 care leavers at
college, and 32 at university, and it is not clear how the progress of this group
of care leavers is monitored by the local authority. The colleges do complete
NEET support plans for those young people who are not attending but,


although these are shared with social workers and personal advisers, the
virtual head is not made aware of them routinely. This adversely impacts on
effective scrutiny and tracking of individual care leavers.
contributions by describing their care experiences, and it provides an
additional source of support and advice for young people as they move
towards independence. Officers working to support the CiCC speak warmly of
the achievements of many care leavers, there are good relationships between
care leavers and these staff.
entitlements are clearly explained. However, care leavers who were consulted
had variable levels of understanding about some of the details, especially in
relation to support into further or higher education.
Leadership, management and governance are good
services and outcomes for children and young people. The local authority
knows its strengths and weaknesses well. Its own assessment of its services
for children and young people is comprehensive, and identifies strengths and
priorities for development. Feedback from children, young people, parents,
carers, staff and stakeholders in Oxfordshire is central to identifying strategic
priorities and informing service development.
identified and reported through the children and young peoples plan. This
aligns with the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) and the priorities of
the Health and Well-Being Board. The priorities are reflected in the Business
Strategy, Early Intervention Strategy, threshold matrix, commissioning
strategy, and placement strategy.
directors and operational staff ensure that key issues, challenges and
strengths in services for children are well understood. The DCS has effective
working relationships with the chief executive, political leaders and OSCB
chair. He demonstrates clear ambitions for children and young people and has
developed a culture of learning. He works well and has developed strong and
effective links with partners in both statutory and voluntary sectors.
development, the Children and Young Peoples Partnership Board (part of the
Health and Well-Being Board) has not yet established effective governance
arrangements with the OSCB to ensure a robust framework for safeguarding
children and young people. While the local authority recognises the need to
ensure governance arrangements are strengthened, it is evident that current
arrangements have not had an adverse effect on the work of the OSCB.


responding to the need to develop a wider choice of services for children and
young people across Oxfordshire. Working closely with partners, especially
health services, it is securing additional provision within the county to improve
outcomes for children and keep the riskiest closest. The placement strategy
is aligned to other key priorities aimed at ensuring a sufficient supply of
adopters, foster carers, edge of care services and supported housing.
However, the number of foster carers needed, particularly for older looked
after children, remains insufficient for the local demand. Following
consultation with parents, carers and children, a new jointly-commissioned
residential academy for children and young people with autism has been
commissioned and is opening in September 2014.
carers within the county boundary means that too many children are placed
away from their own communities. Commissioning priorities derive form the
JSNA, Health and Well-being Board and Young Peoples Partnership Board.
They are informed by learning from serious case reviews and the views of
children, young people, parents and carers. This ensures that provision such
as early help is well targeted. Contracts with providers are subject to robust
quality assurance that includes routine monitoring and review. For example,
clear procedures are followed by social workers when a childrens home or
fostering agency is judged to require improvement or to be inadequate. This
ensures that necessary steps are taken to ensure children are safe and their
needs met.
after children in Oxfordshire. The CiCC have dedicated agenda time to meet
with the panel and discuss their issues. To enable them to have a clearer
understanding of issues and to drive improvement, the corporate parenting
panel has requested additional information on matters such as children
missing from care, the role and effectiveness of the virtual school and
supported housing for care leavers. The panel members maintain a high
profile across the local authority and have effective links with district councils,
as well as regular contact with the local authoritys childrens homes,
childrens centres and early intervention hubs.
in the development of services, staff recruitment and training processes. They
have influence through their strategic representation on the Children and
Young Peoples Partnership Board. They are regularly involved in recruitment
of social workers and have provided an expert by experience view to
conferences, for example the OSCB conference on risky behaviours. The
views of children and young people have also informed service development
and redesign, for example in relation to advocacy and independent visiting.
developing and beginning to demonstrate improvements in service


development and outcomes for children and young people. The role, in line
with the expectations of the College of Social Work, has sufficient status to
influence the corporate management team but maintains an effective link with
frontline services through performance management and quality auditing.
Findings from listening events led by the principal social worker in all three
area social work offices have informed recent developments. These include
caseload reductions for social workers, increased use of administrative
support to improve efficiency, enhanced training for all staff and the
introduction of action learning sets to meet the training needs of senior
practitioners.
reporting to senior managers and area teams. This contributes to
improvements in practice in frontline services. Quality auditing is undertaken
routinely across frontline services. Audits consider practice and casework
issues and have resulted in improvements, for example in the quality of
supervision and of assessment work. Thematic audits are commissioned by
senior management in response to issues arising from performance data,
complaints and serious case reviews. The team recently audited the quality of
work for care proceedings and permanency planning.
data and an improving application of learning from audits and serious case
reviews. Staff routinely receive supervision from managers. The quality of
supervision is improving and inspectors found evidence of some good
reflective supervision. This is strengthened by the introduction of signs of
safety meetings, providing effective oversight of casework to prevent drift
and to focus on outcomes for children and young people.
complaint to the local authority. Children and young people in the CiCC were
clear about their right to complain and felt confident in approaching senior
managers if their informal grumbles were not addressed. However, among
all children and young people receiving a service who were surveyed by the,
CICC, only 62% knew how to complain and 7% of these were reluctant to
complain in case of any repercussion. The CiCC has produced a contact card
to advise looked after children on how to complain, and there are clear
criteria within the Oxford Pledge, but this information is not in an
appropriate format to help younger children understand how to complain.
development. For example, effective learning from case auditing and
complaints resulted in specific training for staff in working with fathers. This
has led to an increase in the number of fathers actively involved in work
under child protection processes. Consequently, the number of complaints
about this issue has reduced. The corporate parenting panel routinely
consider themes from complaints as part of their learning and development
strategy.


Support Service (Cafcass), the local Family Justice Board and the local
authority legal team have resulted in care proceedings now being dealt with
within 27 weeks (better than the national average and almost meeting the
government target of 26 weeks). This, along with improvements in the quality
of assessments, contributes to the avoidance of delay in resolving childrens
progress towards secure, permanent arrangements.
with low use of agency social workers. Staff report that this is because of a
culture of effective support, reducing caseloads and a good living and working
environment. The rate of social work staff turnover is 9%, with national levels
at 15%. The use of agency staff is currently at 5.5% (approximately three full
time staff), significantly better than that for comparable authorities and the
national figure of 12%. Average staff sickness rates are 8 days per annum
with a target of 7 days, again below that of similar authorities and England as
a whole (10 days and 11 days respectively).
board and employer standards. It includes clear actions to build a stable and
competent workforce. Following a recent review, the local authority invested
manager role to strengthen first line management, increase starting salaries
for new social workers and develop a clear staff progression framework. Work
is underway to develop a professional capabilities and competence
framework that is linked to progression and pay.
appropriate skills and are suitably experienced. Training needs are identified
well and often as a result of quality assurance findings, learning from
complaints and serious case reviews. A comprehensive range of in-house
training, including mandatory training, is provided. There are good
opportunities through the use of devolved budgets for individual teams to
commission specific training and resources, for example, team exercises, a
central on-line assessment tool, conferences and development days.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding
Children Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is good.
Areas for improvement:
relationship with other key strategic groups, particularly the Children and
Young Peoples Partnership.
experiences of safeguarding services.
people and their families contribute to improvement of services and training,
and in particular, provide feedback to them to show how their contribution
has influenced service development.
its longer term impact on the quality of practice in partner agencies.
female genital mutilation.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the OSCB
of reference are clear. It is compliant with the expectations set out in Working
Together 2013 to submit an annual report to the Health and Well-Being
Board. It is generally well attended by members, including two lay members
who demonstrate independent challenge to the work of the Board. Members
are of sufficient seniority in their own organisations to be able to commit
resources to support the work of the Board.
Groups. These provide avenues for communication between strategic
managers and practitioners. In addition, the safeguarding needs of vulnerable
groups, including children and young people with disabilities, can be
considered in greater depth.
authoritys Chief Executive, the DCS and Lead Member are sound. However,
links with other key partnerships such as the Children and Young Peoples
Partnership and the Health and Well-Being Board are less mature and require
further strengthening and formalisation.
who is held in high regard by partners. Despite the temporary nature of his


stewardship he has demonstrated constructive and robust challenge and has
established a strong basis for continued progress. A new permanent chair has
now taken over the role.
current Business Plan (201315). Priorities have been informed by the JSNA
as well as learning from serious case reviews, the comprehensive auditing
programme and findings from the routine consideration of an extensive suite
of performance information.
down and remaining ones re-prioritised to meet objectives. This has led to
tangible improvements in practice, including better attendance of relevant
agencies at child protection conferences and core groups. Similarly, work is
underway to develop a coordinated approach to tackling female genital
mutilation.
motivated and committed, and their desire to secure better outcomes for
children, young people and their families is well evidenced by the progress of
work within the sub-groups. For example, the 201213 audit of complex
cases informed the planning of placements for looked after children and
contributed to the multi-agency development of the overall looked after
children placement strategy.
seeking the views of looked after children and young people to improve the
coordination and effectiveness of services. This includes advocating on their
behalf to ensure the commitments within the Pledge are met.
This led to a range of measures to improve its functioning, including improved
representation from schools and colleges. As a result, the Board has
strengthened its support and challenge to schools to provide effective
safeguarding services.
statutory requirements. These have identified a need for some agencies to be
more rigorous in applying safe recruitment practices. Learning from these
audits has been augmented by a very effective peer challenge event for
partners, including the five District Councils. This year a questionnaire was
added for practitioners to complete to test their safeguarding knowledge and
skills.
policies and procedures in place to help professionals understand and respond
to safeguarding and child protection concerns. These offer clear explanations
of, for example, the continuum of need from early help to child protection and


consent issues in information sharing. In January 2014, the Board published a
revised thresholds document to help professionals refer children to the right
services for their needs.
priority-setting, for example at the annual OSCB development day. An
example was the decision to give a higher priority to e-on-line safety, which is
now a major theme in the Risky Behaviours training programme. The OSCB
offers an appropriate, range of training that is informed by messages from
serious case reviews, emerging best practice and case file auditing. For
example, the audit of working with male care givers led to the development of
a new training course that has been launched very recently. Attendance is
monitored and evaluation returns indicate that the training is valued and of
high quality. However, there is little evaluation of the long term impact of
training on standards of safeguarding practice and management, so its
contribution to improvement is not evidenced. Such training is complemented
by safeguarding bulletins and a newsletter distributed widely across the
County and available on a bespoke and informative OSCB website.
Review and Governance Panel. The Quality Assurance sub-group works
effectively to disseminate learning from SCRs undertaken following local
concerns. Most notably this has led to the creation of the Kingfisher Team
that works highly effectively to consider the individual needs of young people
as well as wider issues for those at risk of child sexual exploitation.
of sharing with schools all police domestic abuse reports where there are
children over five years of age. This enables school staff to understand and
respond to the situations faced by these children and young people. A newly
created learning and improvement officer post within the OSCB will further
support dissemination of learning and best practice across agencies.
services in Oxfordshire, including consideration of private fostering and LADO
Activity. However, it does not always focus enough on its impact on the
experience of children who receive safeguarding or child protection help.
the partnership, including on domestic violence. The development of toolkits
to support the identification of cases of neglect and child sexual exploitation
has been highly effective. These are now used extensively by almost all
agencies.
(CDOP). This has a membership of appropriate professionals, is well attended
and has clear terms of reference. Reports are made to the Board that have
led to consideration of broad public health concerns. For example, there has


been a recent awareness-raising campaign on the risks of parents cosleeping with infants. All expectant parents have been given a room
thermometer that incorporates messages about the dangers of this practice.
notifications; of these, two notifications are awaiting a decision to go to
serious case review and five are in the process of being evaluated. Lessons
learned from local and national serious case reviews are effectively
disseminated and contribute to improvements in practice.


What the inspection judgements mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


