London Borough of Redbridge Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 12/09/2016 to 06/10/2016
Report published: 25/11/2016

Childrens services in London Borough of Redbridge are good.

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Requires improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Redbridge are good and improving. Senior leaders and elected
members demonstrate passion, ambition and commitment in order to improve the
lives of children and their families. Services continue to be well managed and
resourced. Sound practice has been further strengthened since the last inspections
for children in need of protection in 2012, when services were judged to be good,
and for children looked after in 2010, when services were judged to be adequate.
The chief executive officer has been in post for eight months. He is already
demonstrating a clear strategic vision to drive forward change and service
improvement, with a particular focus on the councils corporate parenting
responsibilities. He is keen to maximise the involvement of young people and work in
partnership with them as services evolve. During the period of inspection, there was
an interim director of childrens services who, supported effectively by a stable senior
management team, has ensured that the service continues to work well and be
strengthened. The clarity provided by the transition arrangements has protected
local authority childrens services at a potentially vulnerable time.
A responsive senior management team is led by an assured and reflective
operational director. Elected members have recently approved significant investment
to ensure that caseloads remain manageable. Morale within the workforce is high
and staff feel valued. Frontline practitioners are well trained and supported
effectively by diligent and available frontline and middle managers. Management
oversight is strong. Recent necessary recruitment activity, while commendable, has
meant too many changes of social worker for some children and higher support
needs for newly qualified social workers.
The front door services are exceptionally strong, demonstrating a clear
understanding and response to risk, strong multi-agency working and a timely, wellassessed understanding of need. Inspectors found that clear analytical reasoning
underpinned every decision that they observed in the duty team. Children and their
families are well supported by the offer of a wide range of early intervention and
assessment services. Thresholds to services are very clear, appropriately applied and
embedded across all agencies.
Children looked after in Redbridge live in stable homes and achieve good outcomes
in their education, including when placed out of the local authority area. The virtual
school is proactive and has a very positive impact. Tenacious efforts are made to
achieve adoption for children who require this, and changes of plans away from
adoption and the disruption of adoptive placements are few. The quality of
assessment for children requiring adoption is a strength, including consideration of
placing brothers and sisters together. Permanency planning needs to be further
strengthened to ensure that the progress for every child is regularly monitored.
Particular service strengths are evident in consultation and partnership working with
young people and the quality of advocacy services for both child protection and


children looked after. The local authority is in the process of expanding the
availability of this valued service. The local authority is excelling in practice under the
Prevent duty and in work undertaken in Families Together, Redbridges Troubled
families service. Broader partnership working is strong, as demonstrated through the
commissioned services for adopter recruitment, domestic abuse services and wellembedded relationships with the voluntary sector.
The combined role of the child protection conference chairs and independent
reviewing officers is not consistently effective, as evidenced by written plans that are
not always clear about what needs to be achieved, when and by whom. The
escalation process is not consistently used to raise concerns and the annual report
on the effectiveness of the service is overdue. Senior managers have already
identified this as an area for improvement.
A wide range of data and performance information are routinely collated and used to
guide and inform service delivery. This could be further enhanced in order to develop
a clear understanding of the effectiveness of practice for children who go missing or
are at risk of child sexual exploitation. Senior managers have an appropriate
overview of the growing issue of young people affected by and at risk, due to gang
activity and affiliations.
The understanding and delivery of services for those affected by domestic abuse are
very strong. Within a safe standard of practice overall, the local authority needs to
give greater focus to the specific and separate issues in honour-based violence and
ensure that health professionals are directly involved in safeguarding from the outset
in cases of female genital mutilation.
Senior managers understand and celebrate the diverse population within Redbridge,
and practitioners routinely record and consider this in their work. Diversity is clearly
recorded for every child and considered sensitively in work undertaken. Individual
needs of large groups of brothers and sisters are carefully considered. Practice could
be strengthened further to understand consistently the individual experience of each
child in casework in relation to ethnicity, culture and religion.
Services for care leavers have a number of strengths, but are not yet consistently
good. The local authority is in touch with the vast majority of care leavers. They
know their entitlements and the majority are appropriately placed and in
employment, education or training. Support from personal advisers is variable,
pathway plans are not yet consistently helpful and the service needs to have a closer
oversight of outcomes. A small number of care leavers report that they do not
always feel that their successes are celebrated. A small minority have expressed
concerns regarding their accommodation, which the local authority has responded to
promptly.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority does not operate any childrens homes.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in October 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
January 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The interim director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since August
May 2005.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since August
August 2016, as the substantive chair was acting as the interim DCS.
 The local authority has commissioned out the leaving care service. The service
has been managed by a national charity since 2014.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 75,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Redbridge. This is 25.43% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 23.4% of the local authoritys children were living in poverty in
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13.1% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 16.9% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 72.3% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Black and Black British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 65.8% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 57.48% (the national average is 15.7%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data, when this was available.


 Redbridge is the fourth most ethnically diverse local authority in the UK, with
around a third of residents stating that they were born outside of the UK. Almost
half of all children and young people in Redbridge are Asian or Asian British. It
has the second fastest population growth in the country and the second largest
average family size.
Child protection in this area
 At 31 August 2016, 2,343 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a 7% reduction
from 2,519 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 August 2016, 342 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a 27.6% increase from 268 at 31 March 2015.
 At 31 August 2016, 10 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is an increase of one from nine at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection, three serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and no serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at the
time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 August 2016, 235 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 31.3 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 215 (28 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
 Of this number, 161 (or 69%) live outside the local authority area
authority area
 three live in residential special schools,3 of whom all live outside the
authority area
 no children looked after live with their parents
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been 10 adoptions
returned to be looked after


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on
to independent living (although there were 14 in semi-independent
transitional accommodation).
 No children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses in multiple occupation.

Recommendations

Strengthen the quality and impact of the role of the child protection
chair/independent reviewing officer so that there is more effective monitoring
and challenge on the progress of plans, ensuring that all plans that they
review contain specific actions, achievable timescales and clear, measurable
outcomes.


Ensure that cultural characteristics that affect the lived experience of children
are fully explored in all assessments and plans, particularly the risks
associated with honour-based violence. Ensure also that health professionals
are directly involved in considering safeguarding risks at the earliest
opportunity in all cases of female genital mutilation.


Prioritise the recruitment of independent visitors and increase the capacity of
the advocacy service so that all children who would benefit from these
services are able to do so. Ensure that childrens voices are heard in child
protection conferences if an advocate is not involved.


Ensure that there is no delay in the completion of assessments of temporarily
approved family and friends/connected persons carers, and that progress of
children in such placements is robustly tracked and scrutinised.


Ensure that life-story books of high quality are provided to children in a timely
way.


Strengthen service and action plans to ensure that they drive and support the
progress and planning of individual service areas.


Ensure that performance management information is captured, analysed,
presented and used in a way which enables the local authority to achieve
greater consistency in the quality and effectiveness of the support and
services provided.


Ensure that data on missing children provides real-time information about
missing episodes and the offer and completion of return home interviews.


Ensure that the care leavers service has an up-to-date overview of the
educational progress and attainment of every care leaver, and that care
leavers feel that their achievements are fully celebrated.


Summary for children and young people
 Children in Redbridge are kept safe and any risks to them are understood well
and acted on quickly. Senior and frontline managers are highly committed and
keep a close eye on what happens for all children who need help.
 There are many ways in which the local authority ensures that it listens to
children and works in partnership with them to improve the experience for all
children. Children in Redbridge have positively influenced services, and their
views are valued and well respected.
 Good decisions are made for children and their families when first considering
what they will need to support them, including giving careful thought to the
individual needs of brothers and sisters. Social workers visit frequently and see
children alone.
 Plenty of support is available to help children to stay within their own families,
and children only come into the care of the local authority when it is absolutely
necessary.
 If a child is in care, they are secure and settled where they live. They live with
carers who are, or in a residential home that is, well matched to their needs. This
includes placing and supporting children within their wider family. When in care,
children are supported to do well in school.
 Some children have had too many changes of social worker or personal adviser,
and this makes it harder for them to build up trusting relationships.
 The needs of individual children are well understood and their views are sought
and listened to. Social workers know what to do to support children, although
sometimes their written plans dont include their actions and the reasons for the
action being taken. As a result, managers find it hard to keep track of what is
being done.
 The local authority keeps in touch with nearly all care leavers and works hard to
ensure that they are well supported, kept safe and are in work or education. Not
all services for all care leavers are consistently good and a very small number of
care leavers do not feel that their successes are celebrated or that they have a
personal adviser whom they know well.
 A very small number of care leavers have not been happy with where they are
living. Managers have taken this seriously and acted quickly to sort things out for
them.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Help and protection services overall are good, with a front door service that is
outstanding. Rigorous management oversight and decision making results in
services that are of a high quality. This leads to good outcomes for nearly all
children. Management imprint is evident across the whole service.
There is a broad range of high-quality early help services that are effective, being
appropriately managed, well developed and well resourced. When families are
referred to social workers for help, front door services are especially robust.
Partners fully understand thresholds and routinely provide social workers with
referral forms, with the reason for referral clearly identified. The multi-agency
safeguarding hub (MASH) is responsive and effective for every child, particularly in
its work to secure the safety of unborn children. Referrals to duty social workers
are dealt with appropriately and promptly.
Good partnership working, especially with the police, means that child protection
enquiries are undertaken swiftly and effectively. Manageable workloads result in
case recording on childrens files that is generally up to date and completed to a
high standard. Case summaries are particularly helpful. However, services could be
further enhanced if the analysis sections of assessments become sharper and
include more concise conclusions in relation to risk and protective factors in
childrens lives.
Risk to children of living within families with multiple needs such as domestic
violence, substance misuse and parental mental ill health is generally well
understood and risk-managed well in multi-agency forums such as the multiagency risk assessment conferences (MARACs). Understanding of domestic abuse
and the impact it has on children is a particular strength. Progress towards
outcomes could be better understood if written child protection plans included
achievable and realistic timescales. Better use could be made by child protection
conference chairs of planning templates, to give core group members, particularly
parents, a clearer understanding of who is going to do what, by when, and what
difference it will make to childrens lives.
Parents are routinely engaged in plans to improve their childrens lives even when
to do so is challenging. Children are supported effectively to participate in
conferences by child protection advocates. Child protection chairs need to do more
to ensure that childrens voices are consistently heard.
Information on childrens cultural, linguistic and religious heritage is well recorded
and dealt with sensitively by social workers. This could be used more
constructively within assessments and plans to understand and improve their lived
experience. Specifically, the risk of honour-based violence could be better


recognised and responded to, and the response to female genital mutilation could
be more consistent and involve health partners directly at the earliest stage.
Inspection findings

The generally high quality of help and protection services to children is
characterised by secure management grip. Operational managers know their
service well, and demonstrate a firm grasp of what is happening on a day-today basis regarding individual childrens lives. A robust system of case transfer
panels ensures senior management oversight of every case. Considered
allocation of work helps moderate turnover in staffing while supporting the
influx of newly qualified social workers, following investment in services.


Early help services are well developed, well resourced and well managed. The
early intervention and family support service (EIFSS) provides a wide range of
services, including targeted family support, parenting courses, a common
assessment framework (CAF) team, and a small team undertaking return
home interviews for children missing from home or care. EIFSS also benefits
from embedded specialist workers from other services, such as the children
with disabilities team, womens refuge and a mental health nurse from the
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS). Approximately 1,200
children, young people and families are currently benefiting from the farreaching support services that EIFSS provides.


The multi-agency early intervention panel (EIP) manages referrals for early
help effectively. EIP helps to ensure children, young people and their families
receive the right help at the right time by sharing information, agreeing
packages of support and tracking agreed actions. Parents spoken to by
inspectors were very positive about the help they received from early help
services and the positive impact it had on their families lives. One parent
spoken to by inspectors said they were not easily pleased but would give
their family support worker five stars for service. When, for cultural reasons,
a parent felt unable to join a course, the worker went to the family home to
deliver parenting training.


Families Together works with families in profound need across the full range
of interventions in families lives, and it is reported by the local authority that
it is making suitable progress towards its payment by results target by turning
families around. The outcomes records used by the team have been noted as
good practice by central government, which also recognised the strength of
the programme in using its funding constructively to target important local
issues, such as domestic abuse.


A well-staffed CAF team is led effectively by an enthusiastic manager who
uses a range of performance information to monitor CAF activity, the quality
of assessment and the impact of intervention through use of family outcomes
scales. These identified that most CAF cases closed during 201516 showed
some progress, with those identified with higher levels of need at the


commencement of CAF making greatest progress in all areas. Members of
staff and partner agencies spoken to were positive about the support provided
by the CAF team and the benefits to children, young people and families of
being at the centre of assessments and able to access a wide range of support
services.

A straightforward process for stepping cases up from early help to social care
services works well and shows a shared understanding of threshold. The
majority of CAFs are completed by staff in the early intervention team and
childrens centres and these are generally of a high quality. The latest figures
available to inspectors showed that all CAFs were completed on time. There is
further work to do with partner agencies in improving the quality of CAFs they
complete, and for some agencies such as schools to increase the number of
CAFs completed by them.


Front door services are exceptionally strong. The multi-agency safeguarding
hub (MASH) is an effective single point for all referrals for children, young
people and families. Referrers receive good quality verbal advice and
assistance, supported well by clear written guidance contained in the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (LSCB) threshold document and by routine use
of the multi-agency referral form (MARF). Referrers customarily receive
confirmation that their referral has been received, and feedback is routinely
provided to them on what happened as a result. Practice and process for
managing workflow in the MASH is effective. Sufficient and capable
management capacity, combined with swift multi-agency input and good use
of information systems, means that all childrens cases are dealt with in a
timely an appropriate manner. This is a very high level of performance.


The responsive MASH swiftly gathers together both historical and multiagency information, prioritises it and passes it to the duty social work team in
a timely manner. Duty social workers immediately address the presenting
problem with the benefit of checks already in place. Effective training by the
Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) means that thresholds for
intervention are well understood by partner agencies and referrals are
frequently accompanied by MARFS that clearly identify issues. Arrangements
for the out of hours service to hand over to daytime services are secure.
Information received by the MASH on emergency responses that were
required out of office hours is responded to swiftly and robustly.


Consent to a social work assessment of need is routinely obtained by MASH,
ensuring that parental engagement is secured at the earliest possible stage.
Children are seen and seen alone by duty social workers to gather their views
at the earliest possible opportunity.


In all cases seen, this level of efficiency was a precursor to good quality social
work assessment of childrens needs. Assessments were generally timely and
comprehensive, presenting a full picture of childrens circumstances and


needs. Time taken for an assessment to be completed is appropriate and
proportionate to the needs of each child. In the best, assessment, including
risk assessment, was clear and precise and this aided swift and effective
decision making. Some social workers effectively used research to support
their findings, particularly research on domestic violence or the partnerships
Prevent duty. An understanding of relationships within large and complex
families was assisted by the use of helpful genograms. These were particularly
in evidence where legal proceedings were under consideration. The service
would benefit from their wider use. The analysis section of assessments could
in most cases seen be sharper, with a clearer expression of risk and protective
factors, although no cases were seen where children were placed at risk by a
lack of analytical succinctness.

Robust duty social work processes mean that child protection enquiries are
undertaken quickly and effectively. Strategy discussions with the police child
abuse investigation unit are swiftly and routinely undertaken by duty social
workers to identify any immediate concerns for a childs safety. This is
frequently followed up when necessary by a strategy meeting involving key
professionals in a childs life, such as school teachers and health visitors. The
outcome of these discussions and meetings is clearly recorded and forms the
basis of suitably thorough child protection enquiries, which appropriately lead
to child protection conferences where the threshold of significant harm, or the
likelihood of such, is met.


Initial child protection conferences are timely and well attended by partner
agencies. Parental engagement is strong and advocacy or translation services
are consistently provided when appropriate. Social workers reports to
conference are clear and result in considered decision making on whether a
child protection plan is necessary and under which category of abuse. The
councils most recent figures show a reduction from 8% in 201415 to 5%
this year in children made the subject of a child protection plan for a second
or subsequent time. This level of performance is well above that of
comparators.


Initial child protection plans are not effectively prioritised and can be
hampered by timescales that are unachievable. The written plans do not
accurately reflect the good work undertaken by social workers in child
protection work. Core groups modify the child protection plan and reset
timescales to more realistic targets at their first meeting. This means that
parents who attend conferences and core groups see the key professionals in
their lives disregarding child protection plans to which they as parents are
held accountable. Core group minutes do not consistently offer a clear
progress update against specific and measurable child protection plans. One
parent interviewed by inspectors commented that the plan just wasnt
realistic and ran the risk of being detrimental to my mental health, which they
said was [a] risk factor. (Recommendation)



Regular visits, core group meetings and review conferences take place as a
routine part of delivering child protection plans. The councils most recent
figures show that 97% of plans were reviewed regularly, this is improved
performance locally and better than that of comparator authorities. All
children had an allocated social worker who saw them regularly, saw them
alone and undertook direct work with them.


Parents are frequently engaged well in meetings and reviews. Evidence was
seen of advocacy or interpreter services being used to ensure the
effectiveness of parental and child involvement. Better child protection plans
were supported by detailed minutes from well attended core groups,
demonstrating that a very high level of resources are available to support
children. This is particularly the situation with domestic abuse cases, where
planning is aided by the use of assessment tools that clearly identify expected
outcomes. Better plans also identified childrens cultural needs well and made
good use of additional resources available in their community to support the
plan. Notwithstanding some deficits in written planning, keyworkers, core
groups and review conferences were generally vigilant in ensuring that
childrens need for safety are met.


Case recording is generally comprehensive. Manageable caseloads of an
average of 14 in the assessment teams and 22 in the community teams mean
that social workers are able to record their casework thoroughly, with few
exceptions. Childrens comments are recorded when they see their social
workers but, outside of formal advocacy services available at child protection
conferences, the childs voice does not demonstrably influence planning.
(Recommendation)


The majority of children in need (CiN) plans seen appropriately comprised an
ongoing set of practical measures to help the family, in which social workers
co-ordinated the provision of a wide range of support services. CIN plans are
particularly detailed when the case has been stepped down from a child
protection plan or when the plans primary purpose is to prevent a
deterioration in improving home circumstances.


Arrangements for the protection of homeless 16- and 17-year-olds are robust.
All young people presenting as homeless are offered an assessment of need
and the opportunity of reconciliation with their family. Where accommodation
under Section 20 of the Children Act proves necessary, placements are made
with short-term foster carers with an emphasis on retaining stability in the
young peoples lives, such as their college placements. The local authority has
good networks with other London authorities to enable considered decision
making on where gang-affiliated young people can be safely placed. A very
small number progress through the housing departments allocation processes
to tenancies, but this is limited by the availability of suitable accommodation
in the local area. Following mediation, most young people are eventually reunified with their family.



Child protection services for unborn children are strong, and this is particularly
the case when the service is provided by the ante-natal specialist practitioner
embedded in the MASH. When multiple risks are known or identified that are
likely to cause harm to an unborn child, which customarily means parental
substance misuse, mental health issues or the presence of domestic abuse in
the home, robust arrangements are in place to monitor the pregnancy and
ensure the safety of the child. Examples were seen by inspectors of excellent
casework, with a clear focus on the needs of the child and robust child
protection measures in place as part of the birth plan, including removal at
birth where necessary. The standard of all pre-birth planning was undertaken
well but not at the same high quality of the antenatal specialist practitioner
service.


Well established multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARACs) are
consistently well attended by the police, childrens services and the
independent gender violence advocate/ independent domestic violence
advocate service. Risks to children living in homes where domestic abuse is a
feature are therefore well recognised and responded to. Childrens services
attendees provide reliable and effective representation at MARAC, and act as
a direct line of communication to the social work teams. They are therefore
able to share up-to-date information and this aids sound risk management.
MARAC is central to the partnerships approach to managing families who
have multiple needs, and would benefit from more regular attendance by
adult mental health service partners.


When children go missing from home, the dedicated missing childrens team is
diligent and persistent in ensuring that every child or young person is offered
a return home interview. Records of these interviews are full and detailed.
The local authority and its partners demonstrate a high level of awareness
and understanding of child sexual exploitation, as evidenced in contacts,
referrals, return home interviews and assessments. Robust strategic and
operational governance arrangements ensure that, when risks are identified,
cases are escalated appropriately including to the child sexual exploitation
panel or the multi-agency sexual exploitation meeting, where information is
shared well. Inspectors saw good and effective use made of strategy
meetings, which were well attended and resulted in appropriate decision
making, including the mobilisation both of support services to the young
person and disruptive action where necessary. Children and young people
who are considered to be at greatest risk are appropriately made the subject
of monthly child sexual exploitation strategy meetings.


The partnerships approach to children missing education is robust and
thorough. The authority has recently revised its protocol with schools,
providing training and briefings to support its implementation. This ensures
that schools are proactively providing information about families moving in
and out of the borough. As a result, the central register now provides an


accurate picture of children known to the local authority who are not
attending school, either having recently arrived or left the borough. At the
time of the inspection, the local authority had 160 open cases of children
missing education. Of those, 18 involved children coming into the borough
and 142 of children leaving with some of those leaving the borough believed
to have moved abroad. Wherever possible, the local authority pursues its
enquiries to any overseas addresses or contacts it has been given and this is
good practice.

Multi-agency public protection arrangements (MAPPA) meetings are well
attended by partner agencies. Scrutiny of MAPPA minutes demonstrates that
partner agencies share all relevant information to ensure that where adults
being released from prison pose a known risk to children, effective
safeguarding arrangements are put in place. Risk management plans and the
actions associated with high risk individuals are appropriately tracked by the
meeting chair. The childrens services representative consistently attends
meetings and provides links to social work teams. This allows social workers
to undertake any necessary risk assessment on cases when an offender has
links to children, prior to the individual being released from custody.


In cases seen where children were at risk of female genital mutilation, the
partnerships immediate response is prompt and proportionate to risk.
However, risk assessments are not routinely informed by research into specific
religious or cultural practices that may be influencing parental behaviour, and
this is a missed opportunity. Female genital mutilation referrals are low
although some awareness raising has taken place. A clear pathway around
female genital mutilation is in place and all social workers benefit from a clear
understanding of the pathway. Health visitors play an active role in female
genital mutilation work in terms of parental education and monitoring and
provide information to consider risk. However, health professionals do not
routinely directly take part in initial strategy discussions when female genital
mutilation is suspected, although they do provide written information.
(Recommendation)


In the well-resourced children with a disability service, social work caseloads
average 15 and this enables effective work with children and families. CiN
care packages are reviewed regularly and the service benefits from consistent
management oversight and supervision. Social work practice is sensitive to the
needs of children with disabilities, with good awareness demonstrated of child
protection issues when they affect this service user group. The service has
strong working relationships with partner agencies, such as health and
education services and with other social work teams, and this means that the
safety of children who have disabilities is assured.


Children living under private fostering arrangements (PFA) are offered a farreaching service, including allocation to social workers within the long-term
social work teams. Their carers are offered the services of a support worker


embedded in the fostering team. Children are visited and their circumstances
reviewed regularly. Most arrangements are settled and longstanding.
Notwithstanding the high level of service provided, only a small number of
children are identified as living under PFA given the demographics of the local
area. Improving the reach of this service was a recommendation of the last
inspection of child protection services. Information and awareness raising
activities have taken place, although this has not yet had a significant impact
and needs to continue.

A suitable service is provided by the designated officer when allegations of
abuse are made against professionals or carers. Observation of designated
officer strategy meetings by inspectors demonstrated that all relevant
information is shared and appropriate plans for investigation are made by
partners. The current temporary arrangements precede the appointment of a
designated officer who is not a qualified social worker and this is contrary to
guidance within Working Together to Safeguard Children 2015. The local
authority has been able to provide a robust reasoning for the decision making
in the recent designated officer appointment.


Detailed information gathering in the MASH ensures that childrens ethnicity
and heritage is nearly always entered onto the recording system at an early
stage. The councils own performance reports indicate very high levels of
completion. For instance, the childs ethnicity is known in almost all CiN plans.
Inspectors saw good practice examples of social workers making constructive
use of information about childrens unique identity for the purposes of
assessment and planning. Social workers handling of diversity issues is
sympathetic and sensitive, and work to secure childrens immigration status is
particularly strong. However, written assessments and plans reviewed during
the inspection did not invariably make full use of diversity information, by
drawing it together and expressing its impact on childrens lives precisely and
clearly. A small number of cases were seen when this shortfall had resulted in
a failure to accurately identify and plan for the risk of honour-based violence.
Audits by senior managers of cases chosen by inspectors for tracking
identified that the consideration of a childs diversity was a shortfall in a
number of instances. This represents a missed opportunity to understand the
possible impact on risk and protective factors of childrens complex cultural
heritages and the highly diverse area in which they live. (Recommendation)


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

The majority of Redbridges children looked after are settled where they are living
and are progressing well, assisted by good support from a range of services,
including childrens social care, health professionals and the virtual school. The
vast majority of children looked after are reaching the expected levels of progress
in their education and, in some cases, exceeding those expectations.
Decisions that children should become looked after are evidence-based,
appropriate and implemented promptly. Effective practice prior to and during care
proceedings reduces the risk of delay for children. Plans for children to return
home are based on good assessment of need and appropriate support is put in
place to help children remain safe and make good progress.
A relatively high proportion of children looked after are in foster care, despite the
ongoing challenges that the local authority face in recruiting sufficient locally based
foster carers. Good arrangements are in place to ensure that children, including
the small number who live at a considerable distance from Redbridge, are not
disadvantaged by living outside of the borough.
Social workers visits to children are purposeful and well-recorded. The support
children receive is sensitive to their diverse and individual needs. Childrens contact
with family and friends is actively promoted and they are supported well to
understand their life experiences. Risks to children are clearly identified and
managed effectively and there is a robust approach to children who go missing
from care. However, the quality of written care plans does not always match the
standard of support actually provided and the level of challenge by independent
reviewing officers (IROs) to any drift and delay should be stronger.
The reducing number of complaints from children looked after are handled well,
aided by strong independent advocacy support. Not all children who would benefit
from seeing an independent visitor are able to do so and there is a small waiting
list.
Adoption services are strong overall, with adoption being considered for a wide
range of children at an early stage. More consistently robust management
oversight is required to ensure that all cases are awarded the same degree of
urgency. Family finding and matching processes for children who require adoption
are persistent and thorough. Assessments of prospective adopters are
comprehensive and parents and children are well-prepared for adoption.
There are areas of strong practice in services for care leavers but they are not yet
good. Not all their education and training outcomes are tracked effectively and
their successes are not fully celebrated. Not all young people have been able to


maintain or develop trusting relationships with their personal advisers. Care leavers
understand their rights and entitlements well and are receiving good support with
their physical health needs and their emotional well-being. Managers within the
service responded promptly to issues raised by care leavers and they have been
active and influential through the children in care council for older children, Dont
Whisper, in working in partnership with the local authority to make improvements.

Inspection findings

The number of children looked after by Redbridge has remained relatively
stable in recent years, although an increasing number of older children and
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children requiring care has contributed to a
slight rise in the last 12 months. The thresholds for care are appropriate and
consistently applied, with appropriate management oversight and direction.
Children do not come into care unnecessarily and decisive action is taken
when children need to become looked after.


The Public Law Outline is used effectively. Letters before care proceedings set
out clearly to parents what action is required by them to protect and care for
their children and the likely course of action if the necessary changes do not
occur. In nearly all cases seen by inspectors, legal planning meetings and
reviews led to prompt and appropriate action on behalf of children. In a very
small number of cases when there was delay in taking the required actions,
the local authority took swift and urgent measures to safeguard children when
it was brought to their attention by inspectors.


The quality of court assessments and evidence are of consistently good
quality. There is only limited use of independent social worker assessments.
Family group conferences are used routinely and regularly to ensure that all
suitable options for children are explored. In most cases, target timescales are
met and it is appropriate for some to have taken longer. Recent data shows
an average completion time for care proceedings that is reducing and close to
the national average figure despite an increase in the number of care
applications made by local authority in the last 12 months.


When there are plans for children to return home from a period of care, there
are specific and proportionate measures in place to ensure that it is safe for
children to return. Plans are suitably specific, with explicit contingencies and
appropriate statutory safeguards in place when required. Assessments of
special guardians are of generally good quality and the support packages that
are in place after the order has been granted are appropriate to childrens
needs.


The number of complaints from children has decreased steadily in recent
years and the vast majority of complaints are resolved informally. There is
effective support from the valued, but stretched, advocacy service, including


help for children living outside Redbridge. The consistently robust responses
from senior managers to childrens concerns and complaints regularly lead to
positive and appropriate outcomes for children. The local authoritys analysis
of complaints contributes to an increased understanding of service
effectiveness and to plans for improvement.

Only a very few children see an independent visitor regularly. Too many
children who would welcome and benefit from a match with an independent
visitor wait too long for this service, with four children currently waiting.
(Recommendation)


In the majority of cases seen, risks to children were clearly identified and
managed effectively. Risk assessments and management plans are suitably
specific and updated regularly. The detail is understood and implemented as
necessary by all key parties, including a range of agencies as appropriate,
carers, young people themselves, their carers, and family members. In a small
number of cases seen, information was not shared sufficiently with carers and
the agreed actions to reduce identified risks were not sufficiently clear and
lacked the necessary urgency.


Practice to protect children who go missing from care is strong and
embedded. Most children who go missing take up the routine offer of an
independent return interview. These interviews are well recorded and lead to
purposeful follow-up action. Joint work with the police to address issues
relating to young people going missing from residential care and specific
training for foster carers are further examples of a robust response to children
going missing from care. The impact of this joint work has been particularly
strong, with a significant reduction (46%) in the number of incidents of the
young people involved going missing, which, in turn, has reduced the
likelihood of their exposure to associated risks.


The local authority has not met its own target to increase the number of local
in-house foster carers and has not approved a new foster carer since
September 2015. However, the local authority helpfully commissions
independent foster agency placements, ensuring that they are able to meet
Redbridge childrens overall and diverse placement needs. The local authority
reports that 82% of children who are looked after were in foster care at the
time of the inspection (above the national percentage of 74% for 201516).
Overall placement stability is in line with the national average and similar local
authorities. The vast majority of Redbridges children looked after are settled
where they are living and progressing well.


Visits by social workers to children have a clear purpose and direction.
However, due to high staff turnover, not all children have been able to
develop lasting relationships with their social workers, although this has
improved in recent months. Children are actively encouraged to see and keep
in touch with their families and friends, including those who live far from their


home area. When it is in their best interests, they are able to live with their
brothers and sisters. When children have been living and settled with their
foster carers for some time, their views about the continuing frequency of
social work visits and statutory reviews are sought and, in some cases, these
have been appropriately reduced so that children can experience family life
without unnecessary involvement of professionals. They are actively
encouraged to develop and pursue their own hobbies and interests.

The majority of children looked after who live outside the local authority area
are living in neighbouring local authorities and are relatively close to their
home areas. The few children who do live at a distance from Redbridge are
appropriately placed. They are visited regularly by the social workers, and
contact with family and friends is well supported. In all but a small number of
cases seen by inspectors, communication with host authorities and care
providers was effective.


Case recording is of consistently high quality. Chronologies and regularly
updated and case summaries set out clearly the key events and issues in
childrens lives. The voice of children, including those who have language
barriers, is conveyed strongly. There is clear and regular evidence of
management oversight and direction. Childrens ethnicity, religion and culture
are consistently recorded in case records and, in most cases, this knowledge
is used well to inform assessments and plans. Inspectors saw several
examples of good direct work with children and families to help to promote
childrens understanding of their life histories. The support was sensitively
timed and tailored to take account of childrens wishes and individual needs.


Long-term fostering is considered appropriately as a permanent option for
older teenagers as well as for younger children. When it is not possible to find
a direct ethnic match for children, effective action is taken to meet their
diverse needs in the agreed placement. A small number of matching reports
for panel seen lacked full clarity about how carers will meet the individual and
specific needs of children but, generally, the reports are of good quality; in
particular, they coherently represent and take into account childrens wishes
and feelings.


Effective and tenacious support from co-located health professionals, including
the children looked after nurse and the child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) psychotherapist for children looked after, are part of an
embedded multi-agency approach to supporting children looked after.
Childrens physical health needs are given careful early consideration when
they enter care and are addressed routinely in case planning. The local
authority acknowledges, however, that the overall timeliness of initial health
assessments can be improved, and tracks compliance and quality closely,
within current capacity constraints. The percentage of children who have had
an annual health assessment in 201415 was broadly in line with the national
average at 89%.



Some children experience difficulties in gaining access to support for their
emotional well-being and mental health. In particular, there is often a long
wait for children following assessment to receive treatment from wider
CAMHS. However, carers, professionals and families valued highly the support
that children had received from the CAMHS psychotherapist for children
looked after, who provides a range of services, including consultation, training
and direct work with children. This flexible support helps to build the capacity
of professionals and carers to understand and respond sensitively to childrens
emotional needs. This is assisted further by the local authoritys long-standing
and productive use of strength and difficulties questionnaires to inform
assessments and plans for children.


The virtual head is providing effective leadership for the 133 pupils on roll at
the virtual school and tracks progress closely. A small virtual school team
includes four high-level teaching assistants (HLTAs) who see every looked
after child individually on a regular basis. There is good continuity of support
and the virtual school staff come to know the children very well.


Governance arrangements for the virtual school are in place and currently
meet requirements, but they would benefit from being strengthened. The
virtual head has identified this need and plans to strengthen the current
twice-yearly reporting to the corporate parenting board by developing a wider
governing body to provide more effective support and challenge.


Over 90% of pupils benefit from attending schools judged as good or better
through inspection, and the very small number of pupils currently placed in
schools that require improvement are remaining in these schools to ensure
stability. While most children attend schools outside the borough (49%), the
vast majority are attending schools within a 20-mile radius. Attendance is
carefully monitored and current average attendance rates, at 93%, are just
below the national average and in line with London figures.


The vast majority of children looked after are making expected levels of
progress and, in some cases, are exceeding expectations. Attainment levels
and progress for children looked after are generally above the national
averages for children looked after. At the end of the summer term in 2016,
schools reported that 68% of the cohort was making expected, or better than
expected, progress, representing an increase of 12% from December 2015.
This positive progress trend is further reflected in key stages 1 and 4, where
the improvement is better than the national trend.


When children are not making expected levels of progress, the HLTAs identify
and agree support strategies with the school, foster parents and carers to help
children to get back on track.



The vast majority of the personal education plans (PEPs) evaluated by
inspectors were good. All were timely. The best PEPs were characterised by
well-defined targets, clear timescales and effective analysis of childrens
individual progress. The use of the pupil premium is thoughtful and effective.
Schools work well with social workers and carers to counter bullying and
tackle discrimination.


Particularly good work is done to support pupils at key stage 5. The virtual
school is currently supporting 76 young people between the ages of 16 and 18
by working individually with pupils, helping foster carers to provide support to
young people attending sixth form college and other further education
provision, providing one-to-one support and offering bespoke independent
advice and guidance to help young people to make appropriate choices for
their next steps. Only six young people within this cohort are not in education,
training or employment.


No child looked after has been permanently excluded for the past six years,
but there were fixed-term exclusions for 11% of children in 2015/16 and
these disproportionately involved children living outside the borough.
Interventions to schools from the virtual head are beginning to have an
impact and, overall, the number of fixed-term exclusions of children looked
after are now reducing.


Good arrangements are in place to support children who are known to be
electively home educated. The authority is vigilant in registering those families
who are educating their children at home so that they can offer to visit
families and provide appropriate support.


Only five children looked after are currently accessing alternative provision.
The type of provision varies from special needs provision and the Redbridge
pupil referral unit to secure provision out of the borough. The authority
contracts a small number of alternative education providers. A recent contract
has been awarded to a local academy that will provide 40 Year 11 places. The
Redbridge inclusion panel sits regularly, and whenever possible young people
are reintegrated into mainstream provision or found alternative local provision
if necessary.


Foster carers receive good support from their supervising social workers, who
visit them regularly and know them well, offering appropriate challenge when
required. Annual reviews are held in a timely manner. Foster carers are happy
with the overall level and quality of support that they receive, including help
outside office hours. Recently approved carers describe the assessment and
approval process as intensive but realistic, providing the knowledge and
preparation required to provide good care for children looked after. Training
for foster carers is varied and accessible and is available to all foster carers,
including family and friends carers and, when appropriate, carers from


independent fostering agencies. The range of training meets individual needs
well.

Most foster carers spoken to by inspectors said they are well prepared and
information is shared quickly and effectively when children come to live with
them. There is a lack of clarity, however, for some children about their carers
level of delegated authority, although this is routinely discussed at placement
planning meetings and later reviews.


More than a third of current assessments of temporarily approved family and
friends (connected persons) carers have not been completed within the
statutory timescales. While persistent and serious delays in Disclosure and
Barring Service checks are beyond the control of the local authority, some
delays are avoidable, and the progress of the assessment is not always
subject to the required scrutiny of the fostering and adoption panel.
(Recommendation)


In most cases seen, plans for permanence were formulated and pursued
rigorously. However, several aspects of planning could be improved to avoid
pockets of delay. Permanence tracking panels, while usually effective in
tracking and driving progress, at times limit themselves to straightforward
description of activity when, instead, they need to be more directive or
challenging. (Recommendation)


The high quality of practice articulated by professionals involved in supporting
children is not always reflected in all written plans. Written plans, including
plans for permanence, are too inconsistent, and some care plans are not
sufficiently specific and lack detail. In a small number of cases seen,
timescales for planned actions were unrealistic. (Recommendation)


The statutory reviews chaired by independent reviewing officers (IROs) do not
consistently provide a sufficiently strong vehicle for driving forward plans for
childrens futures. Reviews are generally timely, well attended and ensure that
childrens views are heard, but the records of discussions during reviews are
not always clear and, too often, reviews lead to vague recommendations.
Weaker practice, including when there is delay in progressing childrens plans,
is not robustly challenged. IROs need to be more specific and decisive when
monitoring and reviewing childrens progress so that plans for children are
clearer and any delays can be challenged more strongly, when necessary.
Alert processes for IROs to raise concerns about practice or delay are not
routinely used. (Recommendation)


The Children in Care Council comprises two groups of children and young
people, split by age, that represent the views of children looked after and care
leavers in Redbridge. These small but vibrant groups work closely with senior
managers to influence positive change for their peers, including the
development of a pledge for children looked after, a health passport for care


leavers and more equitable guidelines on pocket money. Newsletters are
impressively engaging and professional.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

Adoption in Redbridge is appropriately considered for all children who are
thought to be unable to return to their birth parents. The local authority has
recognised the importance of ensuring that consideration of adoption happens
at the earliest possible opportunity and ensures that it does so in a timely way
for the majority of children. The local authority has provided training to
ensure that social workers keep this option in mind during early planning. The
adoption team manager now attends legal planning meetings. These
measures are leading to a gradual increase in very young children being
placed with foster carers with a view to adopt, or being placed in concurrent
placements.


Managers understand the adoption data well and know where they need to
target their improvements. Adoption practice is understood in the context of
overall safeguarding and managers are targeting training at frontline workers
to encourage them to think more consistently about adoption for children who
can no longer live with their birth families. Recent placements of babies with
foster carers who hope to become adopters show thorough early
consideration of the needs of the child.


Timescales for adoption in Redbridge are largely in line with the national
average and statistical neighbours. The most recently published adoption
scorecard shows that the average number of days between a child becoming
looked after and moving in with their adoptive parents was 551. This is
slightly better than the England average of 593, and 64 days slower than the
Department for Education (DfE) target of 487 days. Similarly, the average
number of days between the placement order and a match with prospective
adopters was 144. This is considerably better than the England average of
figures in Redbridge show a dip in performance on both measures. However,
the data is affected by the complex circumstances of a small number of
children, and the reasons for these are well understood by the authority.


Fewer children are leaving care through adoption in Redbridge than in other
areas, and managers have a clear understanding of the reasons underlying
this. Numbers of children in care who are under 10 years old in Redbridge are
low, with a higher percentage of teenagers and unaccompanied asylumseeking children becoming looked after. Over 33% of children looked after are
over 16 years old and therefore the adoption figures are appropriate, within
the context of the looked after group of children overall.



Decisions that children should be placed for adoption are sound, based on
clear reports which demonstrate the impact of parental behaviour on children.
The agency decision maker records her rationale for decisions, which means
that there is clarity throughout the process. Very few decisions are
overturned, which indicates the robustness of the decision-making process
and reflects the considerable efforts made to achieve adoption for children.
The reversal of decisions to adopt is mostly due to the appropriate
consideration of the suitability of viable family members who became known
late in the planning and were able to offer appropriate care for children within
the wider family.


Children looked after reviews and permanency tracking panels are held
regularly and offer clear management oversight, and this is effective for the
majority of children. However, they need to be more challenging when cases
are not progressing as quickly as they could be. In a minority of cases, there
have been delays in permanency planning or panel attendance, and managers
and IROs need to ensure that there is a sense of urgency within the planning
process for all children, to avoid drift or delay. (Recommendation)


The partnership arrangement with a voluntary adoption agency (VAA) means
that the borough has access to all of the VAAs adopters across the country.
Assessments of prospective adopters undertaken by the VAA are thorough
and analytical, with a clear exploration of applicants history and experience,
and their ability to meet the needs of children. Applicants are encouraged to
think about the needs and experiences of children in care and how, or if, they
can manage certain behaviours. This partnership has led to an improvement
in the quality of prospective adopter reports (PARs), and the most recent
PARs seen were of a high standard. There is an inclusive approach to potential
adopters and single adopters, as well as same-sex couples, who described
feeling welcomed when they expressed an interest in adopting.


Family finding is thorough, detailed and sensitive to the needs of the child.
Social workers make use of online national family finding resources, as well as
adoption activity days and profile days, to find the right families. The ethnicity
of children is considered sensitively when looking for families, but is not a
barrier to prospective adopters, who have the skills to meet the needs of
children. The local authority demonstrates tenacity and determination to find
the right family for children, even when this may take some time. Inspectors
were impressed by the never give up attitude and commitment to finding the
right family for children, including brother and sister groups and other harderto-place children. When brother and sister groups are taken into care, a
together or apart assessment is undertaken, usually by an independent social
worker, which adds objectivity to the process. Assessments seen were of a
good quality and showed clear consideration of the needs of children, as well
as consideration of their wishes and feelings.



Matching is thorough, with a clear focus on how adopters can meet the needs
of the child. The recently introduced matching grid clearly sets out how
prospective adopters will meet the individual needs of children. Due to the
improved early consideration of adoption, the local authority has, in two
cases, been able to identify potential adopters for children prior to the
placement order being made. This means that children are moved quickly into
their adoptive placements, causing less disruption and promoting early
attachment.


Adopters spoken to were positive about their experiences with the local
authority and described good, supportive relationships with their social
workers. They appreciated the support that their social workers had offered
them, describing them as amazing and fantastic. The assessment process
was seen as a challenging but necessary part of the process, which enabled
them to think about the family that they wanted. All adopters felt that they
were given a realistic understanding of the kind of trauma that children looked
after may have experienced and the potential impact of this on children
throughout their childhood. Changes in social worker had caused delays in
some assessments, although the majority are completed in a timely way.


Child permanence records paint a clear picture of the child, detailing family
history and giving prospective adopters a good understanding of the issues
that their child may face. The medical adviser meets parents to talk through
any identified health issues so that parents are able to make decisions with a
full understanding of health implications.


The adoption panel is chaired by a suitably experienced and independent
chair. Panel minutes demonstrate a thorough consideration of prospective
adopters ability to meet the needs of children. Probing questions are asked to
understand adopters suitability. The panel quality assures the information
presented to them and an annual report draws out themes. The agency
decision maker scrutinises recommendations from the panel and will seek
further information if necessary to ensure that decision making is robust.


Introductions are well planned and children are well prepared for moving in
with their adoptive parents. In some cases, books or DVDs were given to
children to help them to familiarise themselves with their new parents. Foster
carers assist with the introductions, so that children who are adopted are able
to develop secure attachments to their new parents.


Adoption disruptions or breakdowns are very rare. When they do occur, an
independent review is undertaken to ensure that learning is understood. An
example of this has led to more referrals for therapeutic support via the
adoption support fund (ASF) to ensure that parents and children are
appropriately supported in preparing for, and following, an adoptive
placement.



Adoption support plans are drawn up prior to a match being agreed. A variety
of training opportunities and support groups are offered that enable parents
to develop networks, as well as to access support. Families are able to request
a post-adoption support assessment and 22 requests for therapeutic support
have been made using the ASF, including for families with older children who
have approached the authority for support. The local authority needs to make
sure that requests are always responded to promptly in order to offer support
when it is first needed.


Life-story books are, in the vast majority of cases, written in simple language
suitable for a small child. However, they are not always provided to families
within the local authority timescale of 10 days post-adoption order. In some
cases, there have been considerable delays in passing on life-story books,
which may have a negative impact on childrens ability to understand their
lives. (Recommendation)


The later-life letters considered by inspectors were of a good quality and
written in a friendly tone, inviting young people to access their files when they
reach 18 years of age to help their understanding of their early lives. They
contained sufficient detail for older children, with an exploration of how the
child came to be living with adoptive parents. This will make childrens
journeys through to adoption easier to understand as they grow older.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement


Services for care leavers in Redbridge demonstrate a number of areas of
strong practice and a generally improving service, including some very recent
additional staffing capacity. However, not all areas are sufficiently or
consistently strong and, overall, the service requires improvement.


Staff are in touch with the vast majority of the 173 care leavers (98%) in
Redbridge. Young people are actively encouraged to remain in care until the
age of 18, and the vast majority do so. The five young people who are
currently out of touch are awaiting outcomes regarding their asylum-seeker
status. While the service continues to make enquiries about these care leavers
to last-known addresses, previous contacts and the Home Office, staff believe
that these young people are consciously evading any contact while they await
the outcome of their asylum applications.


Care leavers are positive about the support that they receive from their key
workers, particularly those attached to their accommodation providers, and
have built trusting, and in many cases long-standing, relationships that have
supported them well in gaining increasing independence.



The relationship offered to care leavers by their personal advisers (PAs) is
more variable. This service is offered through a commissioned partnership,
managed and overseen by the local authority. Care leavers spoken to by
inspectors reported recent concerns, including lack of communication
regarding the changeover of allocated PAs, delays in responding to them and
extended periods when PAs were out of contact. Therefore, although the
service is in touch with the majority of care leavers, the frequency of contact
and quality of support received by care leavers have been inconsistent.


A very small number of care leavers felt that the quality of service had
declined. As from August 2016, the leaving care team has a full complement
of staff, including two new managers, and there are early signs of
improvement. All staff are committed and passionate about their work, with
care leavers showing a determination to improve the service that they
provide.


Pathway plans are generally useful and are completed for all care leavers.
Mostly, they reflect plans linked to appropriate timeframes, and young people
find their engagement in the process of completing the plan helpful. For a
very small minority, this was not the case. For some care leavers, including
the 39% who are not in education, employment or training and the five care
leavers who are currently in custody, outcomes are poor. Some of these
young people became known to the local authority at a very late stage and
the time available to effect change is limited.


Key workers are particularly successful in supporting the majority of care
leavers with their health needs, encouraging them to register with local GPs
and dentists and complete their health history document. As a result, care
leavers have good access to extended health services, including support for
their sexual and mental health. Care leavers demonstrate a good
understanding about the dangers posed by excessive alcohol and drug use.
For the very small number of care leavers who have disabilities, thorough and
well-managed transition arrangements ensure that they continue to be
effectively supported into adult services.


For those young people who are at risk of not achieving their educational
potential, the service has recently developed a pre-apprenticeship programme
to support young people who need to retake their English and mathematics
examinations, offering them a level 1 programme. Although no young people
have achieved their functional skills qualification in either English or
mathematics, the programme helps them realistically to consider their
employment and training options, including progress towards traineeships,
apprenticeships and/or employment.


A generous package of support, including financial assistance, is available for
all care leavers to attend higher education, which, in addition to their fees and
living allowance, includes travel allowance, contribution to internet charges,


book allowance and payment of the television licence fee. Care leavers are
also supported during holidays. This well-considered package of support is
enabling 29 young people to attend university or access higher education
programmes.

Fifty-five young people have accessed, or are currently accessing, further
education courses over the past three years, which is a strong performance.
However, it is unclear what progress these young people are making or how
many of them have successfully completed their programmes. This is because
the service does not have a sufficient strategic overview or accurate, up-todate data on the progress, including the educational outcomes of its current
cohort of care leavers. This means that managers are not able to identify
trends or gaps in provision in order to improve the service for young people.
(Recommendation)


The range of accommodation offered to care leavers generally meets their
needs. Long-standing contracts with accommodation and care providers are
successfully supporting and providing accommodation for significant numbers
of care leavers. In addition, 24 are benefiting from staying put arrangements
and are continuing to live with their foster families. Providers offer a suitable
range of accommodation from transition units with 24 hour staffing, to shared
accommodation with other care leavers, to individual standalone
accommodation. Care leavers are given priority for council housing and a
small number have successfully secured their own tenancies.


A very small number of care leavers have raised concerns about their
accommodation. These concerns relate either to the physical condition of the
property or feeling safe. The local authority has worked consistently hard to
address concerns from care leavers about their accommodation, as evidenced
through the You Said, We did document and through taking swift action
required during the inspection. This level of oversight needs to continue to
ensure that every care leaver feels safe and is living in suitable
accommodation.


While care leavers are justifiably proud of their achievements, including
becoming successful parents, achieving academically or securing employment,
a small number of care leavers report that they have not felt that their
achievements are widely celebrated. Care leavers reported that they
appreciated the positive feedback and encouragement from their key workers.
(Recommendation)


A small number of care leavers regularly make contributions through the
Dont Whisper group to ensure that the views and experiences of care
leavers are influential. Contributions are made to the Redbridge children and
young peoples plan and also by speaking to potential foster carers about their
experiences of being in care. Care leavers participated in the You Said, We
Did process, resulting in, for example, smart clothes being provided for


interviews. A high number of care leavers (45) participated in peer research
through the Children in Care Council in April 2016, giving feedback on the
service that they receive.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Children, young people and families continue to benefit from good-quality services.
Governance arrangements are well developed and effective. Engagement by
elected members is strong. The level of investment, particularly in early help and
in social work staffing establishment, is indicative of the high level of commitment
to children and families.
Senior managers and leaders share a good understanding of the diverse, and
changing, needs of the local community. Senior leaders are well briefed and
provide effective challenge and scrutiny. Senior managers know their services well.
They understand what is happening at the frontline and are in touch with the
experience and progress of the children, young people and families who use their
services. The local authority is a good corporate parent.
The move to a peoples directorate, with a single director of people who has
overall responsibility for children and adult services, has been carefully considered.
Partnerships, at both a strategic and operational level, are well developed. The
Health and Wellbeing and community safety partnership boards work well together
with the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB). The chief executive is effective
in holding the director of childrens services and the chair of the LSCB to account.
The local authority and its partners are in the process of developing a more fluid
response to the strategic assessment of needs, modernising their commissioning
and contract monitoring arrangements, and increasing the influence of children,
young people and families in the design, development and delivery of services. The
local authority should ensure a careful monitoring of the improving service for care
leavers.
The response is robust to children who are missing from home, care or education,
who have been, or are at risk of becoming, victims of child sexual exploitation or
who are in danger of being radicalised. Information is shared effectively, leading,
in most cases, to ensuring appropriate safeguarding and protective action.
Middle and senior managers make good use of performance management
information to manage their day-to-day business. However, the local authoritys
performance scorecard is not yet fully balanced. Written service and action plans
do not fully support the monitoring and evaluation of the positive work
undertaken. While frontline managers provide effective oversight, the quality of
critical challenge provided by independent reviewing officers and child protection
chairs is not consistently robust.
Social workers, including newly qualified social workers, talk positively about the
progress that the local authority has made in strengthening its approach to the
recruitment and retention of staff. Actions taken to improve staff recruitment are
starting to have a positive impact.


Inspection findings

Senior leaders and managers are proactive and make themselves visible and
available to frontline staff. They have a good understanding of the diverse
needs of the local community and are responsive to changing circumstances.
Governance arrangements are robust. A combination of face-to-face meetings
and regular briefings ensures that senior leaders are aware of the challenges
faced by frontline services, including individual cases of concern. This means
that they are able to provide effective scrutiny and an appropriate level of
critical challenge. Senior managers provide effective oversight and control.


The level of engagement by elected members is strong. The corporate
parenting advisory panel (CPAP), which is chaired by the deputy leader,
includes the cabinet leads for housing, skills and development as well as
planning and regeneration. Corporate parenting is taken seriously, as
evidenced by the high level of investment in frontline services and the extra
investment that was used to pay for additional social work posts in order to
ensure that caseloads are realistic and manageable.


The period of transition between the departure of the previous, long-serving
director of childrens services (DCS) and the arrival of the new director of
people, with overall responsibility for children and adult services, has been
managed sensitively and well. This has helped to keep disruption to a
minimum. The potential risks associated with the new arrangements have
been carefully considered.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB), the Health and Wellbeing
Board and the community safety partnership work well together in the
interests of children and families by promoting effective partnerships and
ensuring that appropriate action is taken in relation to key strategic
objectives, including, for example, countering radicalisation and child sexual
exploitation.


Public health colleagues are in the process of developing a more nimble
approach to the joint strategic needs. The prevalence of neglect and domestic
abuse is well recognised. A proactive approach to the challenges faced by
children and young people living in families with multiple needs, when
parental mental health, substance misuse and domestic violence are present,
has led the local authority and its partners to commission an appropriate
range of services. Early help services are of a consistently high standard.


When children go missing from home or care, the dedicated missing childrens
team is diligent and persistent in ensuring that every child or young person is
offered a return home interview. Return home interviews are well structured,
consistently generating a wealth of information which is shared with social
workers, uploaded to electronic case records and used to inform subsequent


action. While the missing panel, which is still relatively new, is not yet fully
embedded, clear plans are in place to strengthen it.

The local authority and its partners have developed robust strategic and
operational Prevent arrangements which ensure an effective, and continually
evolving, professional response to radicalisation. Actual and potential risks are
well understood. Close links with the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH),
multi-agency risk assessment conferences and the child sexual exploitation
panel mean that there is no danger of radicalisation being viewed in isolation.
Schools are fully engaged. With over 3,800 people having completed WRAP
(workshop to raise awareness about Prevent) training, to date, awareness of
the risks associated with radicalisation is high. As well as helping to build
resilience, the innovative young leaders project ensures that young people
are engaged in, and able to contribute actively to, the Prevent agenda.


Awareness of the risks associated with child sexual exploitation is high. Robust
strategic and operational governance arrangements ensure that, when risks
are identified, cases are escalated appropriately to the multi-agency sexual
exploitation panel. Information is well shared. Good and effective use is made
of strategy meetings, resulting in appropriate decisions to mobilise support
and services to safeguard and protect young people.


The sufficiency strategy is currently being rewritten. The local authority has a
good understanding of the current and future demand for foster placements,
although it has not yet met its internal recruitment target. Successful working
with independent fostering agencies ensures that the local authority
consistently finds suitable placements for children and young people. Helpful
partnership arrangements have been put in place to support a suitable choice
of adoptive placements, and out-of-authority residential care is used
appropriately.


Commissioning arrangements are being modernised. Moving away from an
over-reliance on spot purchasing and static service frameworks, the local
authority is actively developing dynamic purchasing systems with a number of
different external partners in order to provide greater flexibility, while at the
same time achieving best value. Contract monitoring is becoming better
focused on impact and outcomes.


Working closely in collaboration with the children in care council and Dont
Whisper, the CPAP has been influential in developing a pocket-money policy,
publishing a welcome pack for children and young people coming into care
and introducing health passports. A high priority is given to involvement,
consultation and partnership working with young people, and there are over
roles of influence, such as the current chair of the safer neighbourhood board
being a 16-year-old member of the youth council.



The chief executive has a clear sense of vision and purpose and a good
understanding of the local authoritys strengths and areas for development.
The chief executive is effective in holding both the DCS and the chair of the
LSCB to account.


Management oversight of practice is robust. Systems and processes,
particularly around the MASH and between the MASH, childrens social care
services and early help, are well understood and well managed. A simple but
effective set of panels, each with its own terms of reference, ensures that
there are appropriate checks and balances in place and that, in nearly all
cases, drift and delay are avoided. Staff receive regular supervision, and case
records consistently and robustly reflect a strong management footprint.


Senior leaders and managers have a clear understanding and awareness of
the changing profile of the local population and take this into account in their
planning. Team and service managers have access to a wealth of performance
management data, which they use effectively on a day-to-day basis to
scrutinise individual and team performance and ensure compliance,
particularly in relation to the timely completion of actions and outputs. Senior
managers make intelligent use of, and act on the learning from, case audits,
themed audits and deep dives as part of a systematic approach to quality
assurance. The way in which services are delivered and developed is
continuously improving.


However, performance management information is not consistently being
used or presented to best effect. For example, the commentary that
accompanies the performance scorecard, which senior managers and leaders
routinely scrutinise, is descriptive rather than analytical and, while some
performance indicators are RAG-rated (red, amber and green colour codes),
others are not. The performance scorecard itself currently includes 13
performance indicators relating to care leavers, but only one on adoption and
none, for example, on common assessment frameworks (CAFs), early help,
the number and percentage of cases that have been stepped up or stepped
down, or the use of the escalation policy. The latest vacancy and turnover
rates are reported elsewhere. (Recommendation)


An up-to-date, well-maintained single missing list ensures that the local
authority routinely knows of every child who is missing from education, home
or care. While the single missing list makes it possible for senior managers to
see at a glance which children, and how many, are missing, the way in which
the database has been constructed makes it difficult to aggregate and analyse
the information in order to identify trends and patterns. This means that
senior managers do not have access to real-time data about the number of
missing episodes or the offer and completion of return home interviews.
(Recommendation)



A clear, well-written, overarching childrens and young peoples plan covering
detailed action plan. The quality of service and action planning at the next tier
down is not as robust. In their current form, service plans are not sufficiently
ambitious, specific or measurable. The quality of audit action plans is also
variable and, despite all the activity that is being undertaken to improve
recruitment and retention, the local authority does not have a workforce
development action plan. The lack of clarity on who needs to do what, by
when, in order to achieve overarching objectives makes it difficult to monitor
progress and hold people effectively to account. (Recommendation)


Independent reviewing officers and child protection conference chairs are not
consistently providing the level of critical challenge that children, young
people and families require. This represents a missed opportunity and
undermines the local authoritys commitment to continuous improvement. The
quarterly report card that is used to monitor the progress and performance of
the quality assurance and safeguarding team is underdeveloped and an
annual report for 2015 to 2016 has not yet been produced.


The local authority has been creative and imaginative in opening itself up to
the voices of children and young people and finding ways of increasing
childrens and young peoples influence, and involvement, in the decisions that
affect their lives. Senior managers act decisively on the learning from
childrens and young peoples complaints.


Good working relationships with Cafcass and the judiciary have contributed to
a reduction in the average length of time that children, young people and
families have to wait for critically important legal decisions to be made.


The local authority has been making a concerted effort to make itself more
attractive to potential employees. Opportunities for continuing professional
development and career progression have increased. Social workers, including
newly qualified social workers (NQSWs), talk positively about the level of
support and supervision that they receive and the training opportunities
available. Morale is good and staff are positive about working in Redbridge.


Of the 54 social work-qualified staff recruited since March this year, 30 are
already in post. Currently, 31 NQSWs are completing their assessed and
supported year in employment. The local authority has worked hard to
improve staff recruitment and its efforts are starting to have an impact. There
is still a necessary reliance on agency staff and turnover rates remain high,
although this is partly a product of a significant investment and increase in the
social work staffing establishment.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
This is a good Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) that provides effective
and robust challenge to partner agencies in order that they provide sound,
coordinated services for children, young people and families in Redbridge.
The review took place at a time of interim cover arrangements, with the LSCB
chair acting as interim director of childrens services (DCS) and the vice-chair of
the board acting up temporarily as the chair. Both have worked highly
effectively and flexibly to ensure a continuous strengthening of the work of the
board. The chair and partners have accurately identified key priorities and
successfully harnessed widespread partnership commitment to ensure that they
are being addressed through a comprehensive action plan. This includes the
refinement of the data set available to the board, which is in progress.
The independent chair of the LSCB provides clear leadership, direction and
guidance. He has facilitated a forward-thinking board and created a culture
where constructive challenge and scrutiny are welcomed in order to improve
service provision effectively.
The board is appropriately constituted and attendance at board meetings is
consistently high, with representation from a full range of key statutory agencies
at an appropriately senior level, as well as exceptionally good engagement and
representation from the voluntary sector. This is evidenced by increased
financial contributions from some partner agencies and the effective chairing of
sub-groups by others. The diversity of the local communities is appropriately
represented through lay members, who are an integral part of the board.
The board has successfully implemented a multi-agency audit programme,
demonstrating a clear understanding of the key issues in Redbridge. The audit
programme needs to become further embedded for the board to be fully
assured that the services provided and work undertaken by agencies to keep
children and young people safe are consistently robust and effective.
The board uses both national and local learning reviews and auditing activity
effectively to ensure that policies and protocols are regularly updated. Training
is comprehensive and of a high quality, but evaluation of training courses is
underdeveloped. The LSCB annual report is thorough, evaluative and well
written. It outlines the priorities, current context, progress made, areas for
improvement and challenges across safeguarding services in Redbridge.


Recommendations

Extend the range of the performance data set to include data on child sexual
exploitation, children missing and female genital mutilation, in order to better
identify patterns and issues to be addressed.


Strengthen the evaluation of training to ensure that it is longitudinal, robust
and can evidence positive impact on outcomes for children and families.


Embed the multi-agency audit programme in order for the board to have
greater assurance of the quality of frontline safeguarding practice.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is well established. It holds
partners effectively to account to ensure that they safeguard children and
young people. This is evidenced through strong joined-up partnership
arrangements at both strategic and local level.


Strong governance arrangements across partnerships are supported by the
inter board governance protocol (2014), which provides clear lines of
accountability, engagement and communication between the Health and
Wellbeing Board (HWB) childrens trust partnership, LSCB, Adult Safeguarding
Board and the community safety partnership board (CSP). The regular sharing
of annual reports and business plans provides opportunities for scrutiny and
challenge, as well as coordinated strategic planning. The governance
arrangements between the chief executive officer, the LSCB chair and the
director of childrens services are appropriate, enabling the chief executive to
hold the LSCB chair to account.


A joint working protocol between the board and the CSP reflects the shared
priority areas, including child sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation,
radicalisation, extremism and violence against women and girls. Crossrepresentation on sub-groups enables effective information sharing, the
shared use of resources, and the development of strategies and services. An
example of this working well is the CSP and LSCB, which worked together to
produce a child sexual exploitation problem profile for Redbridge.


The LSCB chair provides strong, effective and analytical leadership. He has
focused and driven the work of the board since taking up the post in August
constructive challenge. This is well evidenced in board and sub-group minutes
and has shown an impact on, for example, improved health attendance at
child protection conferences and a reduction in social work vacancy rates.
Board partners acknowledge and appreciate the progress made and express
strong confidence in the leadership and management of the board by the
chair.



The board demonstrates a culture of effective and respectful challenge to
partners and agencies, and scrutiny from the chair is serving to improve
service provision. A comprehensive challenge log is kept, reviewed and
updated, measuring the progress and outcomes achieved. For example,
following scrutiny of workforce sufficiency across a number of agencies, a very
serious shortfall in the number of health visitors in Redbridge was identified. A
joint letter from LSCB, HWB public health and the health scrutiny committee
was sent to the Secretary of State. This successfully resulted in additional
funding to address the identified deficit.


Engagement and commitment of partners to the work of the board are very
strong. This is shown through good attendance and considerable effort and
energy in evaluation, action and monitoring by all partners, with a shared
analysisdedicated focus on the jointly agreed priorities of the board. The
boards multi-agency threshold document and the outstanding multi-agency
practice seen in front door services reflect the widespread understanding and
engagement of the partnership in safeguarding practice. The chairs successful
challenge and partners commitment resulted in an increase in contribution
from partners, and the chair has ensured proportionate financial commitment
by partner agencies.


An impressive range of partner representation helpfully includes a broad span
of voluntary agencies, including Redbridge Faith Forum, and three lay
members. Membership appropriately reflects the diversity of the communities
in the area and the breadth of partnership working. Lay members confirm that
they are an integral part of the board, and that their expertise and knowledge
are used to good effect. They regularly observe the training offered, and
feedback to the board and provide consultation on leaflets. For example, the
three lay members provided feedback on a leaflet for parents and
professionals on consanguinity, which was identified as a local learning need.
The expertise and knowledge within the membership reflect the priorities in
the business plan, enabling an opportunity for robust challenge and scrutiny,
as well as a contribution to learning and development.


Involvement, inclusion and partnership working to capture childrens voices
are clear strengths within the board, and the chair is creative in seeking ways
to engage young people. This includes working closely with the lead for the
LSCB youth forum through regular meetings. Youth theatre has been used
widely to raise awareness, particularly around child sexual exploitation and
mental health. A Voice of the Child conference, facilitated by the board,
ensured that the youth forum had a wide-reaching platform from which to
share concerns of young people with professionals and organisations that
provide services to children in Redbridge.


The board is both influential and strategic in shaping and driving
improvements in key areas, including the offer of early help services. The
impact of early help has been evaluated through a childrens trust partnership


report in 2015, which identified strengths and areas of development. The
board monitors uptake of early help through the multi-agency monitoring data
set and it is reflected in a clear overview in the LSCB annual report. Good links
between learning, reviews and auditing activity result in policies and protocols
being regularly updated, for example the development of the multi-agency
neglect strategy and tool kit which was seen used well in practice, the child
sexual exploitation strategy, the female genital mutilation strategy and the
children who have a disability protocol.

The refreshed 2016 multi-agency threshold document, Are you worried about
a child, provides comprehensive guidance to assist practitioners and
managers in every agency to assess and identify a child's level of need. This
was described as providing a common language for professionals, and the
work seen by inspectors strongly demonstrated the usefulness and clarity
provided by the threshold document.


The business plan for 2016 to 2017 is clear and focused on key priorities, and
demonstrates the boards accurate understanding of current local need. The
action plan for the key areas  child sexual exploitation, female genital
mutilation, domestic violence, mental health, substance misuse, violent
extremism, children who have disabilities, neglect and coordinating the
effectiveness of multiagency safeguarding  is outcomes-based, providing
specific and timed actions and measurable impact.


The board operates four sub-groups (training, learning and improvement,
child sexual exploitation and child death overview panel (CDOP)), and these
are effective forums for furthering the work of the board, with each chaired
and managed effectively. The sub-groups feed in to an executive group that
brings these elements together to drive the work of the board efficiently. An
example is the analyses offered by the child sexual exploitation sub-group of
data on the incidence, scale, scope, type and sites of child sexual exploitation,
which resulted in the police using the information to set up surveillance
operations in identified areas.


The board is committed to ensuring that safeguarding is a priority for all
partner agencies and that the board has a way of measuring this. Section 11
audits were last completed in 2014, predating the appointment of the current
chair. The feedback report was not sufficiently comprehensive and the chair
requested a further report on the response to actions of each agency in 2015.
The expectation of what will now be provided has been considerably
strengthened and a further S11 audit will be completed this year, alongside
the implementation of a much sharper and challenging peer review process,
including a self-assessment, and peer and lay challenge via panel interviews.
It is too early to comment on the effectiveness of this, but a clear and robust
programme is being finalised.



Multi-agency audits were re-established by the chair when he took up post in
and between agencies. The current multi-agency audit programme outlines
the themed audits, which are linked to the priorities in the boards business
plan. The themed audits completed so far demonstrate a clear understanding
and focus on the key issues in Redbridge and have included children missing
from education, teenage relationship abuse, child sexual exploitation and
neglect. Impact is shown, for example through the report and the action plan
on teenage relationships that resulted in the identification of local hotspots for
potential perpetrators, which were then targeted by the police. The multiagency audit programme needs to be further embedded for the board to have
greater assurance of frontline safeguarding practice. The chair is aware of this
and acknowledges that they are on a journey to make this more effective.


The board is committed to fostering a learning culture. The learning and
improvement framework is clear, succinct and covers all matters expected by
statutory guidance. Frontline practitioners have a good awareness of the work
and role of the board. It has a good focus on local priorities and identifies how
learning is disseminated. Half-day training and e-learning modules are used to
maximise opportunities for attendance. The training programme and policy for
practitioners and managers across partner agencies. The training sub-group
has representation from key statutory and voluntary partners. It monitors,
plans and has oversight of all training activity. However, the evaluation of
training courses is underdeveloped and the chair acknowledges that more
work is required to enable both the LSCB and partner agencies to be confident
about the impact of training in terms of quality of practice and improved
outcomes for children. The board is developing strategies for evaluating the
impact of training, and the appointment of a training coordinator will
strengthen this area of work.


The LSCB job-shadowing scheme provides an opportunity for professionals
from partner agencies to gain experience and understanding of the role,
functions and procedures of another agency. This is an innovative and positive
way to develop multi-agency partnership working further and contribute to
improving the safeguarding of children and young people in Redbridge.


Child sexual exploitation and missing continue to be a major focus for the
LSCB, and the board is determined to seek to improve services to children at
risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go missing. It has set out a
well-structured and comprehensive child sexual exploitation strategy. Work to
counter child sexual exploitation is driven by the dedicated sub-group through
a comprehensive multi-agency action plan that covers awareness raising,
training and prevention, disruption and prosecution. Chelseas Choice, a
theatre production on child sexual exploitation, has been made available to all
secondary schools. Child sexual exploitation was the subject of a multi-agency
audit, and this enabled the board to monitor and evaluate the progress and


the effectiveness of services for young people at risk of both child sexual
exploitation and going missing. Operation Makesafe is working to raise
awareness with the business community in Redbridge. Impact of the role of
the LSCB has seen increased police involvement with local childrens homes,
and includes children placed by other local authorities.

Countering female genital mutilation is another key priority of the board. A
multi-agency female genital mutilation strategy was agreed in April 2015,
providing clear pathways for the referral for childrens social care and health
services. Awareness raising and training is ongoing with health, including GPs,
education and social care via training courses, information leaflets, updates on
the LSCB website and e-learning modules. The evaluation of the impact of
training needs to be developed further.


The board routinely considers data from partners via a quarterly data set, but
the current data set has some gaps in information across the partnership in
relation to information on child sexual exploitation, female genital mutilation
and missing children. The chair identified early the limitations of the current
performance information, and met with all the performance leads from
partner agencies. Consequently, a more detailed multi-agency scorecard has
been agreed and will be made available to the October board meeting.


Serious incident notifications are thoroughly reviewed by the chair, who has
reviewed three cases to determine whether a serious case review (SCR)
needed to be convened. Ofsted appropriately received notification of all the
cases and the national panel endorsed the chairs decisions not to initiate
SCRs. The board does not have a SCR sub-group. This work is driven by the
chair and the learning and improvement sub-group. The board is focused on
learning and initiates a review when the criteria are not met for a SCR yet
lessons can be learned. This demonstrates commitment to improving practice
and services and maximising learning. National learning from SCRs is
disseminated via newsletter, briefings and the LSCB website.


reference. Reviews of cases are thorough, and there is evidence of challenge
analyses to agencies, and effective and appropriate information sharing.
Learning from reviews is shared to raise awareness among professionals,
parents and members of the public. An example is the publication of
information leaflets on parents genetically related and genetic disorders.


CDOP produces an annual report which appropriately provides a breakdown
by age, ethnicity and analysis of the issues. During 2014 to 2015, CDOP
completed 16 reviews of child deaths. Four had modifiable factors related to
the death and 12 had no modifiable factors. There is considered use of the
data, with clear analysis and findings leading to actions for improvement. All
child deaths are reviewed thoroughly, subject to multi-agency and
professional challenge, and actions for improvement are identified, when
necessary, and tracked in terms of completion.




The LSCB annual report 2014 to 2015 is comprehensive and well structured. It
addresses the priorities, the current context, progress made, areas for
improvement and challenges across safeguarding services in Redbridge. The
boards excellent website is interactive and informative, with up-to-date
information for professionals, children and young people and parents. The
front page provides the latest updates on local and national issues. There are
links to the comprehensive training programme, which can be booked online,
helpful links to policies and procedures, and learning from local and national
reviews. Information for children is particularly well presented in a range of
age-specific categories, providing information in visual and audio format. The
LSCB also helpfully uses Facebook and Twitter to share information and
updates.

Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Hocking
Deputy lead inspector: Nigel Parkes
Team inspectors: Ian Young, Marcie Taylor, Matthew Brazier, Shabana Abasi, Pamela
Blackman, Tilly Heigh, Anji Parker
Shadow inspectors: Brenda McInerney, Victor Reid
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


