Salford City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 21 April 2015 - 8 May 2015
Report published: 22 June 2015
Childrens services in Salford are good
Good leadership means that:
Children and young people are protected, the risks to them are identified and
managed through timely decisions and the help provided reduces the risk of, or
actual, harm to them.
Children and young people looked after, those returning home and those moving to
or living in permanent placements outside of their immediate birth family have their
welfare safeguarded and promoted.


Good

permanence

Good


Requires improvement


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.

Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Executive summary


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences of progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)



Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection



The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates seven childrens homes. Of these, six were judged to

be good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of

children was in November 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for looked after children

was in June 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate. In the same
inspection safeguarding was judged to be inadequate.

Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since October 2014.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since May

Children living in this area
 Approximately 52,269 children and young people under the age of 18 years live

in Salford. This is 22% of the total population in the area.3

 Approximately 28% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.4
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals5:

 in primary schools is 27% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 23% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 14% of all
children living in the area compared with 22% in the country as a whole.6
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are

Asian or Asian Black and Mixed.7


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.
Source: ONS Mid Year 2013.
Source: HMRC Snapshot as at 31 August 2010.
Source: DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics.
Source: ONS 2011 census.
Source: ONS 2011 census.

 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional

language:8

 in primary schools is 15% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 14%).
 The net population gain resulting from international migration is the single most
important driver of population growth within Salford  adding about 1,400 to the
population per year (average 2001-12).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 1,931 children had been identified through assessment as

being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 31 March 2015, 335 children and young people were the subject of a child

protection plan. This is an increase from 278 at 31 March 2014.10
 At 31 March 2015, 15 children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.

This is an increase from nine at 31 March 2014.11

Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2015, 589 children are being looked after by the local authority (a

rate of 113 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 575 (111 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2014.12
 Of this number 214 (or 36%) live outside the local authority area

authority area
 two live in residential special schools, both of whom live out of the
authority area
 three children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months there have been:


Source: DfE Schools, pupils and their characteristics.
Source: DfE Characteristics of children in need in England.
Source: DfE Characteristics of children in need in England.
Source: DfE Notifications of private fostering arrangements in England.
Source: DfE Children looked after in England including adoption.


subsequently returned to be looked after
 three children and young people who have ceased to be looked after and
moved on to independent living
 no children and young people who have ceased to be looked after and
are living in houses of multiple occupation.


Executive summary
Services in Salford for children and young people in need of help and protection and
for looked after children are good. This is the result of a collective determination to
improve services for children from a very low base. The local authority has effective
partnerships with other agencies such as police, schools and health both at a
strategic and an operational level. This includes preventative services and awareness
raising on a range of risks including child sexual exploitation, gang involvement and
radicalisation. As a result children in Salford benefit from well-coordinated multiagency help which is improving outcomes for many.
Following an inspection of safeguarding and looked after children in 2010 which
judged services for looked after children as adequate and safeguarding as
inadequate the local authority engaged with partners in a rigorous improvement
programme. By 2012 services had improved significantly and were no longer
inadequate. However much more needed to be done to improve the quality and
timeliness of assessment, multi-agency planning and actions to protect children. The
current Director of Childrens Services and the interim Assistant Director have built
on firm foundations from their predecessors. This is enhanced by a stable core of
staff and leaders who have been part of the local authoritys transformation from the
onset. Workers value the quality of support and oversight they receive from
managers at all levels although this is not always fully reflected in supervision
records.
Early help support for families is strong, including support provided by the Protect
team to children at risk of and experiencing sexual exploitation. Early help is
improving outcomes for children with a wide range of needs preventing problems
from escalating or re-emerging.
Children in Salford who go missing from home and school or who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation benefit from a coordinated multi-agency response to assess risk
and need. They receive good support which is helping some of those most at risk to
reduce the numbers of times they go missing. Although all children are offered
return interviews the quality of these is inconsistent. Some do not contain sufficient
detail to inform individual plans well or to assist in the analysis of any emerging
trends or patterns.
Multi-agency responses to the significant challenges presented by the high
prevalence of domestic abuse within Salford are very strong. The Junior MARAC is
effective in helping children who are the victims and the perpetrators of violence.
However, there are no services for adult perpetrators that are not court directed.
When children are potentially at risk of significant harm enquiries are timely and
robust based on effective information sharing by all relevant agencies. As a result
children and young people receive a response that is proportionate to the known
risks. In a very small number of cases seen there were resource issues with partner
agencies such as unavailability of police to attend meetings. In these cases partners

worked creatively together and the safeguarding of children was not compromised.
Child protection conferences and core groups are generally well attended by
agencies. Good use of the signs of safety model results in child centred plans to
reduce risk. Although recent initiatives should result in increased participation by
children, parents do not have access to independent advocacy within meetings and
some parents views are not fully represented. Chairs monitor progress of the plan
between conferences to reduce any drift or delay. Children subject to child in need
plans benefit from a similarly robust approach with those that are more complex
chaired by an independent child in need co-ordinator. This offers an additional layer
of independent scrutiny and quality assurance.
Information on children who are accessing alternative education is robustly collated
and analysed for looked after children but is not routinely collected on those living at
home. The local authority recognises that while this is not a statutory requirement,
the experiences of this vulnerable group of young people need to be better
understood.
The local authority has robust arrangements for children who are on the edge of
care which in some cases prevents the need for them to become looked after. When
children are subject to court processes under the Public Law Outline (PLO)
proceedings are concluded within expected timescales, reducing uncertainty and
delay for children. Until very recently monitoring of children in the pre-proceedings
phase of the PLO was not rigorous enough.
Most looked after children benefit from stable relationships with social workers and
carers and live in in good quality placements. Good attention is paid to their health
and they receive timely therapeutic support if needed. They are helped to
understand their past and to express their wishes and feelings. As a result the
majority of looked after children are thriving educationally and socially.
Looked after children receive good practical and emotional support in their transition
to adulthood, including increasingly the opportunity to remain with former foster
carers beyond age 18. Numbers of care leavers in employment education and
training are good although access to apprenticeships is too limited. Performance data
are not systematically used to drive improvement for looked after children, so areas
for development can be missed.
Although there are examples of good individual work with children overall, children
continue to wait too long to be adopted, and adopters are not referred to the
adoption register quickly enough.


Recommendations

Urgently analyse the local authoritys current performance in relation to
adoption so that the reasons for its deterioration against the adoption scorecard
are understood and addressed. Develop robust systems for monitoring and
tracking the experience of prospective adopters and children with a plan for
adoption in order to improve timeliness.


Ensure that all approved adopters who have not yet been matched are added
to the adoption register within three months of approval.


Improve consistency in the quality of return interviews so that all interviews
contain sufficient detail of the missing episode to inform plans to keep children
safer and contribute to intelligence gathering about trends and patterns of
children going missing.


Ensure that parents and carers who need an advocate to support them in child
protection conferences and meetings have access to this service.


Ensure that tracking and reviewing of progress of children in the preproceedings phase of the Public Law Outline is sufficiently robust to prevent
any drift or delay.


Improve the quality and detail of records so that the local authority knows how
many children who are not looked after access alternative education.


Ensure that care leavers have greater opportunities to enter the workplace
through an increased access to apprenticeships and that they all have details of
and understand their health histories.


Ensure that recording of supervision is consistently robust across all parts of the
service and is used to track performance and drive improvement within
individual case work as well as professional development.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children in Salford have been judged to be poor in inspections since

good all of the time. The people in charge and social workers are working hard to
make sure services stay good and get even better. Inspectors think that the new
Director of Childrens Services and her senior team will make this happen quickly.
 The local authority listens to what children and young people want and works

hard to make sure that the services they provide help keep them safe and to
achieve their wishes.

 Childrens centres, schools, housing and many other partners work very well

together when children and their families first need help, and a wide range of
help is available. We found that children and families who have suffered domestic
abuse have very good support.
 Social workers are determined to assist children and their families. They know the

families they work with well and spend a lot of time listening to children. All that
can be done is done to help families stay together. Children who need protection
are helped quickly.

 Children who need an adoptive family sometimes have to wait too long, and

much longer than in many other local authorities. The local authority is working
hard to improve this. Last year, more children were adopted, but there is more
work to be done.

 Children and young people in care in Salford are increasingly doing well at school.

Many of them continue their education after they leave school or do training
which will help them get jobs in the future. When looked after children reach the
age of 18, those who want to, including those who have additional needs, are
able to stay with their foster carers until they are ready to move on. Support to
help them set up their own home or go to university is good.


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection
The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Good

Summary
There have been significant improvements in services for children who need help and
protection. Despite increases in demand for services, thresholds are appropriately
applied in most cases and children and families are increasingly offered a wide range
of services to meet need. This is resulting in improving outcomes for many children.
An extensive range of services is available to support differing needs of children and
families. There is good engagement from many schools in providing an early help
offer. Childrens centres provide bespoke services to meet diverse needs. The suite
of services available through the Early Intervention and Prevention teams ensures
that many families receive a timely and comprehensive response when early help is
needed, including out of hours.
There is very effective information sharing within the newly established Bridge across
a range of agencies including GULF (a multi-agency team to manage organised
crime) and Protect (a specialist child exploitation team). This is supporting timely
decision making to address risk, including in many complex cases. As a result risk
and harm are responded to appropriately, including an effective well-coordinated
response to children who are missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation. The
quality of return interviews for children who have been missing is not always
sufficiently detailed to inform plans.
Strategy meeting are well managed and timely, although in a very small number of
cases there are delays due to lack of police availability. Child protection enquiries are
thorough. Almost all assessments are good, although a few are not comprehensive,
for example in including all relevant adults. Child protection plans and children in
need plans are mostly robust although some require a sharper focus on outcomes
and timescales. Reviews of plans are regular and well attended by a range of
agencies and the majority provide rigour in ensuring that plans progress.
Recent initiatives are resulting in improved identification of young people who are
victims or perpetrators of domestic abuse. This is helping break the cycle of abuse in
some families. There are no adult perpetrator programmes other than those
mandated by the court.


Inspection findings

The local authority and its partners have invested in prevention and early
intervention services and this is making a significant and positive difference in
improving outcomes for many children. There is a wide range of early help
support available to families when needs are first identified which is delivered
by the extensive Early Intervention and Prevention service (EIP), childrens
centres, schools and a range of other agencies. An innovative initiative to
improve access to early help, the No Further Action under 4 project means
that families with children under 4 that do not meet the threshold for childrens
social care are referred to the local childrens centre. The Outreach service,
including the Rapid Response teams, ensures that many families identified as
in need receive a timely and comprehensive response, including out of hours.

Intervention teams are based in localities. This, together with childrens centres
that have good reach and many schools providing early help, means that many
of the families most in need are able to access early help. Childrens centres
offer a range of services including bespoke parenting programmes which have
been adapted to meet the needs of a diverse community, with very positive
feedback from parents about the difference this has made to their parenting.
The focus of the Strengthening Families Programme on mothers who have
already had one child removed is having a significant impact; of the 147
mothers who have accessed the programme in the last two years, 128 are
successfully looking after their child.
appropriately the family history and reason for referral. The best assessments
seen capture the experience of the child well, though a few fail to capture or
articulate well enough the impact of the presenting concern on the childs life.
In a small minority of cases targets and timescales resulting from early help
assessments are not sufficiently clear. It is therefore difficult for the lead
partner and the local authority to monitor fully the impact of the early help
assessment and the support arrangements. Numbers of early help assessments
have reduced by 21% since 2013/14, from 786 to 623, which means the local
authority cannot be sure that all children who would benefit from an early help
assessment and targeted early help services are identified quickly enough. The
local authority has analysed this and is targeting training for those agencies
currently not completing early help assessments. All decisions about whether
referrals meet the threshold for a social work assessment are made by qualified
social workers. Thresholds are appropriately applied in almost all cases, though
a very small number were managed as team around the child when the
threshold for step up to childrens social care was indicated.
appropriate response to risk. The co-location of the police, childrens social
care, health, early intervention and prevention, adult mental health and drug
and alcohol services as well as domestic abuse services, means that relevant

information is shared and robustly analysed to inform decisions about the level
of need and support that families and children require. Advice and consultation
is readily available. For example, intelligence from the GULF team ensures a
good understanding of violence within and between families and supports
effective safety planning for children. The strong interface with the Protect
team ensures that those at risk of or experiencing child sexual exploitation and
who go missing receive a well-coordinated response so that risks are identified
and appropriate action taken to assess needs including the need for protection.
social care in 2014-15. This is partly as a result of the change in the
categorisation of a referral, but also as a result of significant changes in
demographics and continued high levels of deprivation. Thresholds are
appropriately applied and generally well understood by the partnership and no
children were seen to be subject to child protection investigations where this
was not necessary.
childrens social care and referrals passed immediately to the Referral and
Initial Assessment teams (RIAT) for strategy discussions or meetings. Where a
decision on a referral is not made within 24 hours, due to the need to gather
more information, managers do not routinely record the reason for the delay.
This does not assist quality assurance of timeliness of decision making or
identification of themes. At the start of the inspection, managers did not receive
performance information regarding timeliness of decision making. When this
was raised by inspectors the local authority took immediate action and this
issue had been addressed before the end of the inspection. Inspectors saw a
very small number of cases where there had been delay in order to gather
more information and only one where that delay was not appropriate.
within the Bridge which ensures that where there is an immediate risk to
victims, including children, there is an appropriate, timely multi-agency
response to reduce risk. There is a range of services including Salford domestic
abuse service, EIP and the Rapid Response service that can offer immediate
support and advice. Appropriate referrals to these agencies were made in cases
seen. In all cases notifications are sent to health professionals, such as health
visitors and school nurses, so that they are kept informed of recent concerns.
Multi-Agency Referral and Assessment Conferences (MARAC) are held three
times a week and are well attended. These provide robust, timely consideration
of risk and effective multi-agency work to ensure services are delivered to
manage and reduce risk.
people at risk of perpetrating domestic abuse, with clear pathways of referral
for support. A Young Persons Violence Advisor (YPVA) Champion is working to
raise awareness across all agencies about the prevalence and needs of young
people perpetrating domestic abuse, and there are now 24 trained YPVAs

across various agencies who carry cases and undertake work with victims and
young people who harm others. Resources to manage needs identified through
the Junior MARAC only just meet the demand. There are gaps in services for
adult perpetrators as there are currently no perpetrator programmes other than
those mandated by the court.
attended by a range of agencies. In a small number of cases there are delays in
convening strategy meetings due to the non-availability of the police, although
in cases seen this did not delay action to ensure that children are safe. The
quality of recording of meetings is very thorough and reflects effective collation
of key information on family history, agency involvement and known risks.
Actions from meetings are comprehensive, detailed and well recorded. There is
clarity of responsibility for actions so that all agencies know what is expected of
them.
analysis of risk and protective factors. The views of children are sought and
contribute to decisions about next steps. Records are very thorough and
outcomes are appropriate, with good management oversight that is clear and
directive.
factors, in balancing risks and strengths. As a result, young peoples complex
needs and vulnerabilities, including the risk of child sexual exploitation, are
mostly understood and analysed well to inform effective planning. Childrens
views are sought and considered in most assessments although they are not
always central to the assessment. Assessments are mostly timely and in many
cases children were offered services while the assessment was underway. A
very small number of assessments were not sufficiently comprehensive and
robust. In a few cases significant adults had not been involved in assessments
and self-reporting by adults was not checked thoroughly to ensure all
information is accurate. There is a high level of use of written agreements with
parents and although no children were seen to be at risk, in a few cases too
much reliance was placed on agreements to keep children safe.
subject to child protection plans have plans that are up to date on cases seen.
This shows considerable progress since the last inspection. The format for plans
is appropriate and supports recording of SMART objectives. Most include clear
goals, actions, responsibility for actions and timescales. Plans are well written
so that it is evident what needs to change and by when. In a very small
number of plans, goals could be more specific so that the expectations of
parents are clearer to both them and other professionals.
attended. Most ensure robust consideration of risk. Although the numbers of
children on child protection plans have increased significantly from 278 in

March 2014 to 355 in March 2015, the threshold for children being made
subject to child protection plans is applied appropriately. Review meetings
ensure that plans do not drift. For example no children have been on child
protection plans for more than two years. Child protection conferences are well
chaired and there is effective quality assurance of plans by child protection
chairs including between conferences to monitor progress of the plan. Quality
assurance activity by chairs is not yet used effectively to systematically improve
practice or identify themes. A database for capturing issues raised through the
escalation of concern process by chairs has just been introduced to fulfil this
function.
have a positive impact on improving rigour within initial and review
conferences. Between January and May 2015, 28% of children attended their
child protection conference. A project which captures childrens views online is
being rolled out across the service and indications from the pilot are that it will
increase their participation. Parental attendance at conferences is better (78%
in JanuaryMay 2015).
equivalent service for parents. This means that there is more to do to ensure
children and parents are fully represented when they are unable to advocate on
their own behalf.
the role of the CIN coordinators is ensuring an independent overview of more
complex cases including those stepped down from child protection. Core groups
monitor plans rigorously, very directly addressing the plan, progress and review
of actions from the previous meeting. However in a small number of core
groups the plan is not reviewed in sufficient detail, with some actions not being
progressed over several meetings.
receive regular visits from workers. Most case files include good detailed
recording of visits. They include descriptions of observations of very young
children which provide a clear sense of the child and their attachment to
parents, as well as parents bond with the child.
of services. Direct work with children is well embedded in practice and creative
methods are used to assess wishes and feelings of children. Direct work is
available from a range of services to meet diverse and often complex needs.
This includes work to address risk of child sexual exploitation and to establish
routines to support young people to access education. In almost all cases,
findings from direct work inform risk assessments and plans, with many good
examples of risks being reduced as a result.


Examples were seen where this was resulting in an early response, with holistic
assessments of risks and needs, but this is a very recent initiative and it is too
early to evaluate the impact. There were examples of effective work when
children are subject to plans, for example intensive family support to parents
with mental health problems and good information sharing at case conferences
and child in need meetings. However the extent of need is not yet fully
understood. Work is being undertaken with Public Health to understand more
fully the data on children in the city who are living with parents with an alcohol,
drug or mental health problem. Until this work is completed the targeting of
services to ensure all children who need them receive them is based on
incomplete information.
protection plans due to neglect (46% March 2015). Cases seen for the purpose
of the inspection were closely monitored by social workers and conference
chairs. Many had a range of support to meet different needs within families.
However, the neglect strategy has not yet been launched and use of the
Graded Care profile (a tool to support analysis of neglect) has reduced. The
partnership is aware of this, has analysed the reasons and intends to deliver
further training to support practitioners to use the tool effectively.
sexual exploitation benefit from a coordinated multi-agency response to assess
risk and need. A range of multi-agency meetings ensures effective information
sharing and the tracking and monitoring of all these groups of children. As a
result of these arrangements coordinated packages of multi-agency support are
provided to meet young people's immediate and long term needs. In a number
of cases seen this is leading to reduction of risk.
youth workers provides those vulnerable to, or experiencing, child sexual
exploitation with a range of skilled interventions that reduce risk and provide
young people with sustainable strategies to support them to keep safe. Cases
are held at the appropriate threshold levels and there are currently 32 children
ranging from 11 to 18 years known to this team. A wide range of training and
workshops to raise awareness have taken place in Salford and referrals to
Protect have increased by over 30% this year, but the extent and reach of the
training on child sexual exploitation has not been mapped. The partnership
recognises that there is more to do, and plans are in place to address this for
example raising awareness among young people through schools, and work to
promote community awareness of sexual exploitation through Operation Avert.
has increased substantially over time. In 2011-2012, 461 episodes were
reported. In 2014-15 there were 315 children who had 824 episodes, which is a
slight reduction on the previous year. A small cohort of children accounts for a
high number of missing episodes. The partnerships have developed a range of

initiatives to address this, including a new multi-agency project to provide
intensive support to those most at risk when missing and to offer return
interviews for other young people. Early indicators show that the project is
having some impact, with a reduction in missing episodes for the group of most
prolific missing since the project started from 66 episodes in the three months
up to the end of January 2015 to 26 episodes from January to April 2015. In
addition young people are starting to take responsibility for their own
behaviour. All children are offered a return interview and the vast majority take
up the opportunity, indicating front-line workers persistence and sensitivity in
engaging with them. Data are also showing a marked improvement in the
timeliness of return home interviews with 73% completed within 72 hours in
the three months to March 2015 compared with just 28.9% from October to
December 2014. The partnership recognises that there is more to do to reduce
the number of children going missing, for example improving the consistency
and the quality of return interviews to better inform analysis and understanding
of the reasons why children go missing.
these 91 were still recorded as missing at the end of the year. The local
authority does not remove any child from the register until their whereabouts
are known and a school place confirmed. This is good practice. Clear
procedures ensure that all professionals understand their role in reporting
children missing from education. School attendance is closely monitored and
close liaison between education welfare officers and schools ensures prompt
action to reduce risk.
support offered when needs are identified. Reasons for elective home education
are carefully scrutinised and, action taken to safeguard children if necessary.
The local authority keeps an appropriate record of children and young people
they are directly responsible for who are accessing alternative provision.
However, the number of children and young people accessing alternative
provision through their schools and the quality of this provision are not
recorded by the authority. While this is not a statutory requirement the local
authority acknowledges it is good practice and would increase its understanding
of the experiences of this vulnerable group of young people.
LSCB, is raising awareness across community groups and the partnership. The
number of children notified to the local authority as privately fostered has
increased over the last year from 10-17. The number of queries from the public
and partner agencies has also increased. Sustaining awareness is promoted by
a range of measures, for example incorporating a question relating to private
fostering within every early help assessment and continued work to promote
the benefits of undergoing an assessment through publicity campaigns. For
those children who are privately fostered, statutory visits and assessments are
undertaken within timescale, are thorough and in accordance with guidance.

Assessments consider a wide range of needs resulting in the provision of
appropriate levels of support to ensure that children are safe.
approach to support homeless 16-17 year olds, has resulted in a significant
reduction in the number of young people placed in bed and breakfast. From
March 2014-Jan 2015 there were 15 young people placed in bed and breakfast.
This reduced dramatically to two young people placed in bed and breakfast
accommodation for two nights this year. Homeless young people receive timely
and appropriate support, but this is not yet effectively reflected in procedures.
A joint protocol with housing is being refreshed to reflect current practice where
all homeless young people are referred to childrens services and a social work
single assessment undertaken. Inspectors saw no examples where young
people should have been looked after but were not.
evidenced by the number of consultation and referrals to the service in the last
year (155 consultations and 174 referrals in 2014-15). In cases sampled,
effective management by the LADO ensured that allegations against
professionals were taken seriously and appropriate steps taken to safeguard
children, including the convening of strategy meetings where required. While a
wide range of work has taken place to promote understanding of the role of the
LADO in the past, there are limited examples of this in the last year, and there
has been a reduction in attendance at LADO training events. The service
recognises that there is a need for renewed efforts to maintain agency and
public awareness.
planning for all children. In cases where children are from minority
backgrounds, issues of culture and identity are explored and analysed well to
inform assessments and planning. Issues of identity and sense of self are not
always explored sufficiently for white British children, for example those
growing up in areas of high deprivation and poverty or with complex
backgrounds and life experiences.
female genital mutilation, few referrals are made to childrens social care.
prevention of radicalisation. Nevertheless, due to its close proximity to priority
areas and the transient nature of communities, its response under the Prevent
agenda is suitably robust. Monthly meetings with the Channel Team (a
specialist team to identify and respond to risk of radicalisation) and the Prevent
Engagement Officer (who works with key institutions and statutory partners)
share information on risk and any new referrals. From January 2013 to March
Currently one young person under 18 is receiving a service as a result of this
initiative.

The experiences of progress of children looked after and
achieving permanence
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Services for looked after children have improved since the last inspection. Children
benefit from positive enduring relationships with social workers who know them well.
Families on the edge of care are well supported which in some cases prevents
children becoming looked after. When children cannot remain with their birth families
court processes under the PLO are effective and timely achieving early permanence
for some children. However some children experience delay at an earlier stage.
The vast majority of looked after children and young people live with families in good
quality homes within 20 miles of Salford. Children with complex needs are well
supported by Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services known locally as STARLAC
so few children experience a disruption to their placement.
Looked after children are making good progress at school, attendance is much
improved and performance at all key stages is improving. Independent Reviewing
Officers provide effective challenge to ensure childrens needs are met.
Robust arrangements track children missing education and those who go missing
from care. Risk of child sexual exploitation to these vulnerable children is well
considered. Effective action is taken which is reducing risk for many children.
The timeliness of placing children for adoption is deteriorating and the local authority
has significant challenges in adopter recruitment. The adoption register is not being
used fully to make available nationally those adopters for whom the local authority
does not have a suitable match. The assessment and training of individual adopters
is thorough and social workers complete reports which give a comprehensive picture
of the child to assist the identification of a suitable family. Post-adoption support for
placements and adopters is strong.
The local authority is in contact with all its care leavers, who reported that they feel
safe. They are consistently supported by workers who know them well. The majority
live in good quality accommodation that meets their needs. Although access to
apprenticeship schemes is limited, the proportion of care leavers who are in
education, employment and training is well above the national average. Not all care
leavers have access to their health histories.


Inspection findings
in care continues to rise slowly. This is due in part to effective work of the local
authority and partners, responding to a history of poor social work decisions
which resulted in children staying in abusive family situations too long.
Improved early help is identifying younger children who need to become looked
after more quickly.
management level. The Families on Track Panel provides an effective multidisciplinary forum to discuss children and families so their needs are known and
understood and effective decisions made to provide support. Good work is
undertaken with families on the edge of care. This ensures all that can be done
is done to support families and prevent children becoming looked after
unnecessarily.
good quality services to prevent subsequent family breakdown. Outreach
workers provide practical and emotional support including out of hours. The
adolescent team, for example, offers support to children, families and schools in
addressing complex behaviours. In cases seen decisions for children to return
home were based on realistic assessments of parenting capacity including
capacity to change. This, combined with appropriate support services, resulted
in positive outcomes for the young people concerned.
assessed and planned way. Social workers have good quality legal advice
regarding thresholds for legal proceedings. The Resource Panel chaired by
senior managers provides comprehensive scrutiny of high risk cases, ensuring
that thresholds are robustly applied, and that all other options for children are
explored thoroughly.
permanence early for most children including good use of family group
conferences, action to instigate parallel planning and to escalate childrens
cases where they have been subject to a child protection plan for more than 18
months.
information provided by social workers is too descriptive and not sufficiently
analytical to support decisions. Decisions made at legal planning meetings are
sometimes poorly recorded, and there is a lack of clarity about when actions
will be completed. Systems for monitoring pre-proceedings work were not clear
or robust until very recently. Decisions to invoke the pre-proceedings phase of
the PLO were not always followed through in a timely fashion, and timescales
for review of cases in pre-proceedings were not always met. At the time of the
inspection 20 of 63 children in the pre-proceedings phase of the PLO had been

subject to it over six months. The local authority has taken recent action to
strengthen monitoring of pre-proceedings work and is in the process of
reviewing the circumstances of all these children to ensure they are not
experiencing drift.
Social workers provide good quality reports to the courts. Cafcass statistics
indicate that in 2014-15 Salford concluded care proceedings within the national
target of 26 weeks in 45% of cases. Average duration for care proceedings in
Salford is 26 weeks. This represents very strong performance in reducing delay
for children.
looked after children which it recognises currently lacks a robust evaluation of
the range of current services and has targets for improvement that are
imprecise. Despite imaginative use of social media and targeted campaigns to
recruit carers for specific groups of children where there are recognised
shortfalls, overall in-house sufficiency and choice of foster placements has not
significantly improved. In 2014-15, 22 mainstream and specialist foster carers
were approved, as were 27 connected persons. There were 40 resignations of
foster carers in the same period. Of these, 26 were due to foster carers
becoming special guardians for the children in their care. All foster carers are
offered an exit interview when they leave but take up is low so reasons for
resignations are only partly understood.
by judicious use of high quality placements through independent fostering
agencies. All children who live in independent foster placements are in
placements that are at least good and 63 children live in agency placements
that are rated outstanding.
sisters when it has been assessed to be in their best interests. At the time of
the inspection one family of children were not placed together due to a lack of
resources. Those children lived with carers in the same area and saw each
other every day.
mainstream, short term and long term therapeutic services. Applications to
foster to adopt have increased and there were two current applications at the
time of the inspection.
support from their supervising social workers and feel well supported.
Outcomes for young people are good, including in the intensive 3D scheme and
Focus Fostering, which address the needs of some very challenging young
people.


who is helping to maintain and drive up standards. Fostering panel minutes
show an appropriate level of challenge, a focus on fast-tracking cases when
necessary and appropriate monitoring of carers including safety, smoking and
dog checks. Assessments of foster carers are thorough and balanced. Reviews
of foster carers are comprehensive and appropriately carried out by the
fostering panel. The reviews include the views of young people where these
can be gathered. The timeliness of these reviews is now 91%, which is a
considerable improvement on previous figures.
homes in Salford or within 20 miles, and the vast majority of these live with
families. Effective work has been undertaken in the last year to reduce the
number of children placed in out of city residential provision (from 22 to nine).
Salford has a policy of only placing children in good or outstanding provision so
the vast majority of children and young people live in places that are at least
good. When a placement is judged as less than good, its effectiveness in
meeting the individual needs of children is considered carefully at all statutory
reviews and children are only moved if it is considered to be in their best
interests. As a result these children are well matched, their needs are met and
outcomes are improving.
support annually. An agreed standard support package is provided and there is
a commitment to no detriment to foster carers financially if they become
Special Guardians. Assessments of applications for an SGO are thorough. As a
result the number of young people leaving care through an SGO has recently
improved from the low figures in previous years and in 2014-15 26 children
were successfully placed with their former foster carers via an SGO.
national averages (55 on full care orders and 31 on interim orders). Regular
robust review of this group of children is required to ensure that they do not
remain subject to statutory orders unnecessarily. IROs have identified that
there are a small number of cases where children are living at home on care
orders that could be discharged using SGOs or Child Arrangement Orders. Plans
are underway to apply to the court for discharge of these orders.
workers, children and their families. Social workers visit children regularly, know
and understand their needs well and can articulate their successes and what
needs to be done next. There are many examples of social work interventions
with looked after children which are making a discernible difference to improve
their outcomes. Social work assessments have improved over time and the
majority of assessments seen are of good quality. Social workers are intent on
understanding childrens experience and on meeting often complex and diverse
needs. In the vast majority of cases seen by inspectors assessments have led

to good quality direct work that helps children. For example using research on
homophobic bullying to tackle issues and protect children more effectively.
quality assessment of need. They are regularly re-assessed by social workers to
reflect the changing needs of children, including those with a disability, to
ensure they are met. The majority of care plans comprehensively consider the
diverse needs of children and young people. In cases where the childs diversity
needs are a central feature, they are sensitively met.
their life history through purposeful direct work including input from STARLAC
where this is indicated. Social workers are increasingly effective in their work
with children and young people with the most complex needs and engaging
with reluctant children and their families. They are tenacious in their efforts to
improve the lives of looked after children.
effectively matched with an independent visitor to support their care plan but
there is a small number of children (12) who would benefit from this
relationship where plans have not been progressed. Eight of these have been
waiting for longer than six months. Although the local authority has recently recommissioned the independent visiting service some children wait too long.
outcomes. Performance in relation to initial health checks (90% within 20
days), annual health checks (95%) and immunisations (98%) is good. There is
a small number of looked after children placed out of the city who do not
experience the same timely completion of their initial health assessment (18%
of those placed out of area). The rate of children and young people recorded
as having a dental health check last year was also low (78%). The local
authority has identified it as an issue of underreporting as only those children
registered with a National Health dentist are included. This means that the
local authority does not have a full understanding of its performance in this
area.
mental health services through the STARLAC Team. This provides a range of
individual therapeutic and group work to children with emotional, mental health
and behavioural needs, including children placed out of area within a 50 mile
radius.
depending on need and the quality of information provided by other agencies.
At the time of inspection there was no waiting list. The most recent
management information shows that this work is making a discernible
difference and is effecting positive change in the vast majority of cases (38 out
of 45). Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are completed annually and are

used as a screening tool by STARLAC. However, they are not used routinely to
routinely inform health assessments.
from offending including effective work to deter young people from guns and
gangs, the rate of looked after children involved in the criminal justice system is
high and rising. Despite this there are examples of the youth offending service
in conjunction with social work staff making a real difference. The youth
offending service is currently working with 13 looked after children. The
majority of these are on referral orders, one is on remand to the care of the
local authority and four are in custody. The local authority recognises more
needs to be done and this area of work is subject to an action plan including
better analysis of first time offenders to help shape early help.
aspirations for their looked after children, which is reflected in improving
educational outcomes. Almost all children looked after attend good or better
schools. For those who are in schools requiring improvement, the reasons are
well considered and clear. Children attending these schools are very closely
monitored by the virtual head teacher. Most children looked after enter the
Foundation Stage well below that expected in relation to their age. During Key
Stage 1 nearly all make rapid progress, and at the end of this stage their
attainment is broadly in line with that of all children in Salford.
reading, writing, grammar, punctuation and spelling were above the national
average for other looked after children and the same in mathematics. Although
below that of all children in Salford, and despite the decline in performance
compared with 2013, the gap between looked after pupils achievement and
that of all children is narrowing in all subjects apart from mathematics.
mathematics, is improving. In 2013/14 the proportion of young people gaining
five or more GCSE grades A*-C including English and mathematics improved
from 11.1% to 17.1%, some 5.1% above that nationally for all looked after
children. Inspectors saw examples of pupil premium funding being used to give
young people additional tuition leading to some young people exceeding
expectations. However, performance was 31% below that of the attainment of
all Salford children. The rate of progress is not yet rapid enough to close the
attainment gap at this level.
recognition that they are not yet consistently good, a view shared by
inspectors. Close partnership working with schools, social workers and
designated teachers, including a range of training linked to the outcomes of
quality audits, is beginning to improve the content and quality of plans.


appropriate, individualised learning and emotional and behavioural support for
looked after children. This includes one to one tuition and immediate access to
an educational psychology team that includes a specialist in therapeutic
approaches. This, combined with close partnership working with schools, is
proving successful in improving attendance and reducing exclusions. In the last
seven years, no looked after children have been permanently excluded. The
proportion of children excluded from school for a fixed time is reducing. It is
currently 6% and below the national rate of 9.8% for looked after children.
in care is 5.4%, similar to that of all children. The education welfare service
liaises well with schools to support those children whose attendance is
declining. Individual schools use a range of methods to monitor and tackle
children who miss parts of a school day.
thorough and included as a possible indicator in assessing increased risk of
child sexual exploitation. The virtual head teacher has a comprehensive
understanding of where all children are accessing their education and the hours
they are accessing. Where the full entitlement of 25 hours is not being
accessed, appropriate plans and strategies support the increase to full time
education. Looked after children who go missing or are sexually exploited
receive the same comprehensive service from Protect and the missing from
home pilot as other children.
monitored, with a strong focus on performance and attendance. The quality
and provision of these placements is carefully monitored. The needs and the
ambitions of the child are well matched when considering alternative provision.
carers have access to a broad range of social and leisure activities. Many
activities are arranged throughout the year and in the holidays, including trips
that are chosen and planned by the children and young people. Children looked
after by the local authority are actively encouraged and supported to participate
in activities that are just for them and in those that all children in Salford
access. The pupil premium funding is used appropriately to support looked after
children to attend school trips and participate in out of school activities.
looked after children have an up to date care plan. Permanence is considered
for all children at the second review. IROs offer effective challenge when
permanence is not pursued with sufficient rigour. For example in February 2015
the IRO service convened a collective problem resolution meeting', with the
interim Assistant Director and Head of Service. As a result 100 childrens settled
placements with independent fostering agencies were reviewed and action

taken to ensure that appropriate placements were ratified as permanent by the
panel.
participating in their review from January 2015 to the end of March 2015. There
are many examples of younger children making an effective contribution to
their plan and of carers observations of nonverbal children being used to
inform plans. Advocates have been used well by some young people; this has
helped them to ensure their views are known and understood at their review
and used to help shape their plan.
children are well represented by a small dedicated children in care council Fight
for Change. Its activities are well publicised in a quarterly newsletter sent to all
looked after children over the age of eight and the group runs a stall at the
annual celebrations event for looked after children. Efforts so far to attract new
members have not been successful. Fight for Change vigorously represents the
interests of looked after children and has made a valuable contribution to the
improvement of the service since the last inspection.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement
forecast average time from becoming looked after to date placed for adoption is
achieved in 2011-14. 586 days is 99 days above the national target of 487
days, and the gap between Salfords performance and national targets is
widening. The average time between placement order to matching is projected
to be 236 days for 2014-15, which would be a decline in performance from the
the national targets. This also represents a widening of the gap between
Salford and national targets.
successful. Recently the local authority has placed considerable reliance on
taking part in a regional consortium to encourage adoption applications rather
than local campaigns. Salford has in the past often recruited from outside the
city, but enquiries to this regional consortium are directed to their home local
authority, reducing the number of applicants to Salford. As a result, the number
of enquiries, which was 355 in 2013-14, has reduced to 288 during 2014-15, a
reduction of 19%. Attendance at applicants training courses dropped in the
same period from 57 to 33, a reduction of 43%. The local authority is now
intending to refocus on local adoption recruitment. However, this years

reduction in applications will almost certainly impact on adoption capacity
during 2015 and beyond, delaying some placements.
register. Of these nine, five have been approved for over three months and
therefore should be included on the register. For five of the 11 who are now on
the adoption register, this took more than three months, with two taking over
who are waiting in Salford requires further analysis by the local authority.
there have been improvements in the number of children adopted in the past
year. Five children (11%) were from a BME background compared with 5%
reported in the 2011-14 scorecard. However, the improvement in the number
of children adopted is from a low base and the numbers of children adopted in
the local authority have been consistently below similar local authorities since
compared with 17% for similar authorities. The 43 children adopted in 2014-15
therefore represent an improving picture but the local authority is not yet
consistently performing at the level of similar authorities. Demand is increasing
and currently the local authority has 44 children awaiting adoption, four more
than in 2013-14.
adoption tracker is used to follow the progress of individual children, relevant
data are not regularly gathered, aggregated, analysed and used to drive
improvements.
adopters, the local authority is effective in making these processes timely and
helpful. Of those adopters approved in the past year 88% were approved within
the national target of eight months. Adopters were complimentary about the
speed of response and the positive messages they received from Salford when
they first made enquiries. In two cases this was instrumental in choosing
Salford rather than another local authority or voluntary adoption agency. All
adopters spoken to by inspectors found the adopters training illuminating, for
instance regarding attachment issues for adopted children.
and measured, for instance regarding issues from applicants history. There was
good use of applicants own words to make these reports more vivid. All
necessary checks are comprehensively carried out.
considered at the second looked after childrens review. Seven young people
became looked after and have had a decision that they should be adopted in
the last six months. All had the decision made by the Agency Decision Maker
within five months of becoming looked after which represents robust practice.

functioning and presentation, including where they have complex needs. Family
history is detailed and convincing regarding the reasons for the care
proceedings. Contact with parents is carefully considered and observations of
children are used well to give a picture of their attachments and feelings. The
reports are informed by a wide range of assessments, including psychological
and parenting assessments, which are carried out with an appropriate sense of
urgency. The agency Medical Adviser is prompt in providing almost all
permanence medicals. However, the current contact between brothers and
sisters was not always evaluated and issue of future contact between them was
not sufficiently addressed in most reports seen.
sufficient challenge, for instance regarding adopters applications. There is a
sound working relationship with the Agency Decision Maker who provides
prompt scrutiny of the work of the panel. The panel is quorate and members
provide a useful range of experience, for instance as foster carers or adopters.
However, there are currently no members on the panel from the wide range of
ethnic and other backgrounds within the local authority area.
they received about the child was accurate and comprehensive, including that
from the current carers. When children had specific health issues, adopters met
paediatricians to be fully informed regarding the childs condition. All adopters
spoken to by inspectors had plans for matching which ensured an appropriate
pace for introductions and placements. There have been no disruptions prior to
an adoption order being made in 2014-15.
and individualised to the childs story. There were some examples of very
detailed life story books for older children. Social workers are clear that this life
story work is a priority within the looked after children team and is a vital piece
of work for a child.
the year the local authority received 194 requests for post adoption support
which is highly accessible to young people and adults. 34 young people are
currently receiving post adoption support and there is no waiting list for this
service. A dedicated social worker carries out a thorough initial assessment and
may provide support on a short term basis while a plan is being formulated.
Involvement by partner agencies such as schools is very good. Inspectors saw
examples of direct support work with young people post-adoption which was
accessible, high quality and effective. Support to adopted adults and birth
families is appropriate and timely. There are 245 letter box contacts, of which
support, the pupil premium and the changes made in the Children and Families

Act 2014. Adopters spoken to were aware of the support package which
Salford provides. All had adoption support plans which were tailored to their
childs needs and which they found helpful.
and, where necessary, support from the virtual head teacher. Inspectors saw
this being used to relieve stress in an adoptive family and prevent placement
break down.
The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good
time of the inspection staff were in touch with 100% of young people and as a
result opportunities to improve their life chances are maximised.
and well supported by workers who know and understand their needs well.
They value highly the relationships workers have developed with them over
time. Low staff turnover in the Next Step Team, coupled with an unwillingness
to move cases between workers unless absolutely necessary, creates high
levels of consistency for young people. The quality of relationships developed
provides a firm basis for effective support and when necessary, challenge.
for young people aged 16 plus. The centre is currently working with 84 eligible,
as a place to go that helped them feel less isolated. They report they receive
good support from their individual workers and from other team members.
with group work sessions and the opportunity to practice independence skills
such as cookery. A recently established health drop- in staffed by the LAC nurse
and STARLAC gives easy access to advice and support on health issues up to
the age of 19. This initiative is too recent to evaluate its effectiveness.
worker with personal advisers supports effective partnership working to reduce
risk. Arrangements to support care leavers who are experiencing drug and
alcohol problems are well developed and young people are engaging with
services. All young people are screened for substance misuse when they
transfer into the Next Step Team and the specialist substance misuse worker
undertakes a range of activities aimed at reducing use and building resilience.
Between March 2014 and March 2015 work was undertaken individually with 22
young people. During the same period the worker ran three groups, each
involving 12 young people.

forms of exploitation including sexual exploitation. Those assessed as at most
risk or as experiencing exploitation have plans for intervention that are clear. In
cases seen, risk was reduced and the capacity of the young person to make
safer choices increased.
young people receive a copy of their last health plan and their immunisation
status. The local authority acknowledges that this practice is not widespread,
systematic or sufficiently robust. Recently work has been started to develop a
health passport. National insurance numbers, birth certificates, passports and
provisional driving licences where applicable are provided to all care leavers for
enhanced identification purposes. Asylum seekers also have an application
registration card and legal letters in line with their individual circumstances.
of which were detailed and thorough and with a high level of analysis. The
pathway plan template is easy to use and supports the worker to identify needs
and then create an action plan specifying how those needs are to be met. The
best plans included the voice of the young person but practice is not yet
consistent in this area and needs to improve further to ensure that the process
is meaningful to all young people. While action plans are generally good and
clearly specify tasks to be undertaken to improve outcomes, contingency plans
are not always included. This means that some young people are not
sufficiently challenged at the planning stage to really think through potential
consequences of their situation.
Review reports are detailed and contain evidence of challenge to both practice
and to young people.
the transition to adult services. Continuity of service is provided throughout the
period of transition. A senior practitioner within the Next Step team takes the
lead in this area ensuring that cases are identified and proceed to the
Transition Panel. Inspectors saw examples of cases being taken to the panel
and linked to an adult worker who will eventually take over the case when the
young person becomes 18.
their foster placements after they reach their 18th birthday through the local
authoritys Staying Put scheme. The option for young people to remain with
former carers has been available for some years under a previous scheme
Continuing Care. The local authority recognised that this scheme did not
encourage carers for more challenging young people to participate. These
arrangements have now been superseded by Staying Put. Strong performance
in this area resulted in all young people who turned 18 staying in their foster

placements in the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. Currently there are 22 care
leavers being supported to remain living with their foster carers.
better than statistical neighbours and the national average for the last three
years. The range of supported accommodation options is good, providing
various levels of support that enable young people to move towards
independence at their own pace. Strenuous efforts are made to move young
people who are found to be living in unsuitable accommodation.
accommodation all of whom were in custody. There were no young people in
bed and breakfast accommodation. According to the local authoritys
unvalidated data, at the time of the inspection, 58% of all care leavers were
living independently. This is slightly lower than the published data at 31 March
support worker assists young people to bid for a property and provides ongoing
support to maintain their tenancies. The housing protocol identifies care leavers
under the age of 21 as a priority group.
to start again when arrangements had broken down or had not worked out as
they had hoped.
weaker often lacking rationale for why decisions have been made. This does
not assist young peoples understanding if they come back to access their
records later in life.
children in its care and care leavers. At 78%, the proportion of care leavers
who are in education, employment and training (EET) is well above the national
rate of 45%. Currently 25 (7%) care leavers attend university, which is just
above the national average of 6% and in line with the average in the north
west of England. It remains considerably below the figure for all Salford school
leavers.
university, and personal advisers maintain close contact with them. Two care
leavers who are on masters programmes receive this same good level of
consistent financial and practical support.
provide 12 apprenticeships through its own business operation. Overall, eight
care leavers are on apprenticeship schemes, but only one of these is with the
local authority. Of the nine young people who have benefited from local
authority apprenticeships in the past, six progressed into employment. The DCS
has undertaken to improve access to a wider range of apprenticeships in the

local authority. Support for care leavers to gain employability skills is provided
through a range of activities that facilitate the development of wider skills such
as communication, presentation and time keeping.
nursery places to help them ensure their children get the best possible start in
life.
year olds in custody compared with comparable authorities and national
averages (8% compared with zero % and 3% respectively). Currently,
according to the local authoritys unvalidated data, it is 3%. While performance
has improved and is now the same as the national average for last year, no
analysis has been undertaken or measures considered to maintain and further
reduce custody rates.
authority is responsive in ensuring that these are met well. Personal advisers
are tenacious in ensuring that young people get what they are entitled to and
this is supported by good literature which young people acknowledge they have
received. The local authority celebrates the achievements of its care leavers in
several different ways. Young people spoken with talked enthusiastically about
the annual celebratory event for looked after children and care leavers.


Leadership, management and governance
Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The local authority has a consistent clear focus on improvement. The vast majority of
the areas for development identified throughout this inspection had already been
identified by senior leaders as requiring targeted improvement and are part of an ongoing robust improvement programme. Appropriate governance arrangements and
effective working relationships between the local authority, the LSCB and other
strategic bodies such as the Childrens Trust and Health and Wellbeing Board are
helping drive this improvement. They are supported by strong strategic and
operational partnerships to prevent and reduce risk including a focus in relation to
domestic abuse, child sexual exploitation, organised crime and radicalisation.
Significant improvements in the quality of practice across the service have been
made and sustained in most areas leading to good outcomes for most children.
However, improvements are not yet fully reflected in key documents which lag
behind practice, for example, the Salford looked after children strategy and the
neglect strategy. The early help strategy requires significant updating due to
developments in practice since it was first published in September 2014.
Performance management, quality assurance processes and scrutiny arrangements
are robust but until recently have largely focused on the experiences of children who
need help and protection. Reporting of performance data in relation to looked after
children and care leavers has not been as systematic or used to analyse trends with
the same rigour, although performance in relation to the experience of individual
children is monitored closely.
Management oversight of casework is evident and staff benefit from regular
supervision that offers support and challenge although this is not always reflected in
written records. Corporate parenting is well embedded and senior leaders are
committed to the needs of looked after children in Salford. The needs of these
children are well understood and prioritised, which serves to inform strong
commissioning arrangements. Arrangements to ensure that the views and
experiences of children and young people contribute effectively to service planning
and delivery are comprehensive and robust.
The workforce is stable and children and young people in Salford have sustained and
meaningful relationships with consistent workers. Social workers feel well supported
by both the senior leadership team and line managers. Staff are supported through a
well-targeted and effectively delivered training programme.

Inspection findings
been revised to further strengthen arrangements to discharge statutory
functions smoothly. These revisions have been made following the ending of
the Ofsted Improvement Group. The senior leadership team has a wellinformed overview of the strengths and weaknesses of services and quality of
practice due to robust quality assurance. The DCS and senior managers are
visible to staff, are respected and take an active role in audit and wider quality
assurance activity. There is clear political commitment to childrens services and
while savings are being made in the local authority, these have been minimised
within childrens services provision.
Services (lead member) and the DCS are strong. The lead member attends
both the Childrens Trust and the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWB), which
gives continuity and avoids duplication. The compact between the LSCB,
Children and Young Peoples Trust and the HWB has been recently revised and
demonstrates clear responsibilities for services at a strategic level. The local
authority recognises that the HWB has, until recently, been dominated by adult
issues and is now in the process of developing its arrangements in respect of
childrens services. Corporate parenting is well embedded across the local
authority, with sustained commitment to the needs of looked after children
from both elected members and senior leaders.
social work staff and stability of looked after childrens placements, as well as
the timeliness of supervision to staff. These improvements have been sustained
and are directly contributing to improved outcomes for children and young
people. Arrangements to respond to referrals by the Bridge and RIAT teams are
robust. The same Head of Service has strategic management and oversight of
the Early Intervention and Prevention service (EIP), the Bridge and RIAT. This
has improved the consistency of the application of thresholds between services.
improvement. For example, the draft multi-agency neglect strategy has not yet
been finalised and the looked after children strategy is out of date and requires
improvement.
effectively collated or analysed within services for looked after children and care
leavers as it has within other parts of the service. This means that although
operational and strategic managers have a good insight into the progress of
individual children, they do not always have a detailed enough overview of the
bigger picture. At the point of the inspection the local authority had already
identified this as a gap and made arrangements for the dataset to be refreshed
and extended.

after children requires extending, scrutiny arrangements to effectively monitor
performance across childrens services are well informed by quality assurance
and audit activity. Committee members have an accurate awareness of
strengths and weaknesses across Salford children's services. The committee
has contributed to city-wide strategic plans which are updated to reflect areas
for improvement. For example the current update of the Salford City Plan,
which is in draft form, includes increased sufficiency of fostering as a priority.
The recently revised Scrutiny Committee has become increasingly proactive in
gathering a comprehensive range of performance information, including
learning from audits and complaints.
practice standards. This was appropriate in light of the local authoritys journey
out of inadequacy following inspection findings in 2010. A further unannounced
inspection of arrangements for the protection of children in October 2012, while
finding Salford no longer inadequate, identified seven immediate priority actions
to address deficits in practice including risk assessment of referrals, timeliness
of strategy meetings, case recording, contingency planning and quality of
supervision. The local authoritys current increased focus on quality and
outcomes as the next stage of improvement is appropriate and its selfassessment that it is making good progress in moving from a compliance
culture to a performance management culture is accurate. However, a critical
analysis of the local authoritys performance across childrens services is not yet
fully reflected in written documents including elements of the self-assessment
which in parts is too descriptive. This has been identified by the local authority
as an area for development to achieve the local authoritys ambitions to
consolidate and build on its current good performance.
appropriate information to senior leaders and monitoring arrangements for
safeguarding are robust. Monthly performance meetings chaired by the interim
Assistant Director and all heads of service are effectively supported by regular
data analysis by childrens services specialists within the corporate data team.
outlined in the Mayors city plan, underpinned by directorate plans and service
plans. Safeguarding, including prevention of child sexual exploitation, troubled
families and looked after children, is appropriately prioritised. Issues from
practice are fed back into strategic planning and used to inform future
priorities. For example learning from a thematic audit of children subject to
repeat child protection plans has resulted in an action plan that includes
training for workers in recognising disguised compliance.
in case work, the implementation of management action plans, in a minority of
cases is not timely or robust. Most staff (93%) now receive supervision every
four weeks and social workers spoken to by inspectors report good support

from line managers. Supervision arrangements are supported by the provision
of quality reflective supervision sessions provided by the Advanced Social
Workers. The quality of recording of supervision is variable. Stronger examples
show clear focus on personal professional development, celebrate good practice
and challenge poor practice. Weaker examples are too brief, consisting of a list
of actions that do not enable performance development of social workers to be
routinely tracked and evaluated.
exploitation through its involvement in the LSCB child sexual exploitation subgroup. Governance arrangements for responses to child sexual exploitation are
clear and effective. They are led by a senior police officer and social care
managers. A comprehensive range of information is shared and crossreferenced across partners. This has led to improving intelligence of child
sexual exploitation activity in Salford. Robust action is taken to disrupt
perpetrators and serve abduction notices. Salford joined Greater Manchester
Police and Manchester City Council childrens social care in the well-established
Protect Team 18 months ago, and this has ensured support to young people as
well as disruption activity is effective and well-coordinated. Leaders have
committed resources to continuing this service.
relation to child sexual exploitation through their enhanced scrutiny of missing
and child sexual exploitation reports. Members of the Corporate Parenting
Committee have met with the Borough Commander to assure themselves that
work in this area is effective. The City Director has agreed funding for an
independently led review of historical cases as a result of findings from the Jay
report into child sexual exploitation in Rotherham.
frontline managers and senior managers including the interim Assistant
Director. Inspectors saw examples of managers supporting workers to improve
practice in their day to day interaction with them. Good practice is routinely
recognised and acknowledged personally, including by the interim Assistant
Director. Social workers spoken to greatly valued this recognition which spurs
them on to greater efforts.
activity. The local authority programme of audit activity includes thematic
audits based on analysis of performance management information and
individual cases. Learning is further supported by multi-agency audit activity
undertaken by the LSCB. All learning is effectively collated and shared with
practitioners and has contributed to sustained improvements. For example, an
audit of the quality of core group meetings has contributed to an improvement
in the implementation of child protection plans and improved attendance of
partners at meetings. A significant amount of additional audit activity is
currently in progress, for example on step down arrangements from child

protection to team around the child and an audit of repeat referrals. While
these are well targeted it is too early to identify their impact.
people and families and monitoring of these is robust. Strategic commissioning
is informed by a joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), but this is not
comprehensive. It includes information on safeguarding issues, looked after
children and risk in relation to missing children. However, child sexual
exploitation is not included. The local authority and partners have identified
that the JSNA requires refreshing to better reflect current priorities and the
rapidly changing local demographic of families within the local authority.
Strategic planning has identified, for example, the need to improve
identification of hard to reach families in the community. This has resulted, in
well targeted commissioning of services through childrens centres to provide
continued support to minority groups including some sections of the Orthodox
Jewish Community, with a Jewish childrens centre run and staffed by members
of the Jewish community.
arrangements and have made a valuable contribution to the commissioning and
development of services. For example, children subject to child in need or child
protection processes are now able to access support from the advocacy service.
The local authority understands its local population and works hard to improve
engagement with the large Jewish communities within the borough for
example; bespoke safeguarding training has been developed for the Orthodox
Jewish community; work has been undertaken with the two academies for
Jewish children with efforts made to raise awareness of bullying and
safeguarding concerns, although the Local Authority acknowledge that whilst
there are representatives from the Jewish community on the local safeguarding
board it remains a challenge to gain access to and work with the Jewish
independent schools including addressing safeguarding issues. There is also
liaison with the Jewish Federation to encourage participation by the Jewish
schools in individual childrens assessments to engage this community more to
in better supporting their children.
Young People's Participation Strategy 2013-18. This strategy has ensured that
there are clear and robust mechanisms to gather the views of young people in
Salford regarding services and their experiences. This information is used
proactively to inform service development and review service provision. The
views of children and young people are gathered from a number of groups of
young people across Salford. These include school councils, young carers
group, Voice of Child Advocacy Group, Teenage to Adult Group and the Young
People's Council. Input from young people is used to improve services.
Examples of improvements as a result of their involvement include the
distribution of information sheets outlining support services to young people
and the development of an online programme to enable young people to
participate in child protection conferences.

Change. There are effective links between this group, the Childrens Trust and
the Corporate Parenting Board and this has resulted in the needs of children
and young people in Salford being well understood and planned for.
Representatives from Fight for Change have contributed to the review of the
local authoritys pledge to looked after children. Care leavers and Fight for
Change members have also participated in staff recruitment and selection.
However, the local authority recognises current membership is not sufficiently
representative and has undertaken a wide range of activities to attract new
members but so far with only limited success.
maintaining a stable workforce of qualified and well experienced social workers
and children and family support workers. Social work stability for the last year is
good at only 2% turnover. Workforce planning is effective and is underpinned
by the Childrens Services Workforce Strategy 2014-17 which provides clear
recruitment and retention strategies. This has ensured that the use of agency
staff to cover vacancies is kept to a minimum. Currently there is a vacancy rate
of 11%. Agency staff made up 8% of the workforce at the time of the
inspection.
workers (4% of the workforce) in their assessed and supported year in
employment (ASYE). The framework includes a range of mandatory training
and opportunities to gain advanced level three qualifications. Each social worker
has an annual appraisal. The Organisational Development and Training Plan is
clearly aligned to the Salford Business Plan and ensures that training needs are
appropriately identified and training is sourced and delivered effectively. While
evaluation of training does occur following some training events, consistent and
robust evaluation of training and its impact on learning for practitioners is
underdeveloped.
However inspectors saw a few workers with up to 25 cases which was high due
to the complexities of the work. Newly qualified workers have reduced
caseloads and benefit from comprehensive arrangements to support their
development, and this is further supported by frequent joint working
opportunities on complex cases. Caseloads are well monitored across the
service.
independent chair. All ensure that lessons from serious case reviews and
learning reviews are effectively identified and disseminated across the
partnership in Salford. Frontline staff are able to articulate learning and identify
changes in practice as a result. For example, training on the needs of homeless
to support this cohort of young people, and bed and breakfast is now

considered only in emergencies for a very limited period of time. At the time of
the inspection no children were in bed and breakfast accommodation.
are coordinated through Customer First. The annual complaints report is
comprehensive, robust and fully addresses learning as well as future areas to
be targeted. Lessons arising from complaints are well identified, collated and
disseminated and lead to well-targeted and sustained improvements. For
example, the buddy system for foster carers has now been reviewed to ensure
buddies are geographically close.
low risk, the approach to the prevention of extremism has primarily focused on
integration and awareness-raising. As a result, the Prevent Strategy has been
implemented by the Partnership and Engagement Team within Strategy and
Change, with governance and local authority leadership through the Community
Safety Partnership and Partnership Delivery Group.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good.
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Executive summary
The Salford Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has made consistent progress,
benefiting from strong independent leadership and significant political support. The
boards sub-groups have progressed their respective areas of responsibility. Shared
leadership of the groups demonstrates the commitment of partner agencies to
safeguarding. Governance and accountability arrangements are clear, with the
independent chair reporting directly to the City Director. These meetings are not
formally minuted and to do so would increase transparency.
The LSCB has clear priorities which inform the boards business plan, and progress is
proactively monitored to ensure the pace of change is maintained. Partner agencies
are held to account for their safeguarding arrangements and the methods of
challenge and scrutiny are effective in helping agencies continue to deepen their
understanding of safeguarding issues. There is careful learning from serious case
reviews and other serious incidents, which is widely disseminated. There are clear
action plans which are regularly monitored to ensure progress. A comprehensive
programme of Section 11 audits includes robust scrutiny of the evidence submitted.
The board maintains good oversight and scrutiny of work to identify and protect
young people who may be at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go
missing from home or care. The overarching strategy locally and pan-Greater
Manchester is well embedded and understood.
The LSCB delivers a comprehensive and well-attended multi-agency training
programme, though does not yet evaluate its impact on multi-agency practice. There
is good oversight of the recently-launched early help strategy and threshold
guidance. The board has recognised the number of early help assessments has
reduced and is examining the reasons for this. The board has also driven
improvements in the operation of the multi-agency front door service and continues
to monitor the impact of changes. The neglect strategy has been consulted upon but
is not yet finalised. These developments are not yet reflected in the published
safeguarding procedures, which the board is updating.
Safeguarding performance data are scrutinised regularly and more recently the board
has developed a more comprehensive multi-agency dataset that provides scrutiny
that is more equitable challenge of all partners and that is well aligned with the
boards priorities.

Recommendations
the early help strategy, thresholds of need, and arrangements for a multiagency single point of contact for children as these initiatives continue to
develop and mature.
partnership. Ensure that the published multi-agency safeguarding procedures
accurately reflect local services and pathways for children in need of services
including recent changes so that all agencies can clearly understand them.
people, practitioners and lay members are able to make.
independent chair of the LSCB and the City Director and also the formal
meetings with the DCS.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
priorities based on the current needs assessment and leading to a clear action
plan. The LSCB chair is independent and reports directly to the City Director. He
is suitably experienced and brings a wide knowledge of initiatives elsewhere to
assist in developing this board. He meets regularly with the City Director and
the Director of Childrens Services (DCS). These meetings are not minuted
which is a shortfall, though there are other records such as exchanges of
emails that provide evidence of the issues discussed and progress made.
Health and Wellbeing Board, but governance arrangements between these
strategic leadership groups requires further strengthening. The compact does
not yet include the Community Safety Partnership (CSP) or the Adult
Safeguarding Board, which would formally clarify arrangements between all the
relevant key strategic bodies. The lack of a compact between the LSCB and the
CSP is offset, to some extent, by some senior officers being members of both,
which assists with communication. The LSCB and the Adult Safeguarding Board
jointly commissioned the most recently published serious case review and both
are disseminating the learning. The independent chair of the LSCB also sits on
the City Partnership in Salford which brings together a wide range of sectors
such as local universities, the elected mayor, and businesses. This provides a
good opportunity for safeguarding issues to be raised outside of the core
partnership.
relevant agencies, demonstrating good commitment to safeguarding. Political
oversight is strengthened with the lead member for childrens services sitting as
a participating observer. Partners discuss issues in a good level of detail with
mutual challenge. All LSCB partners make financial contributions to the board
and it has an appropriate infrastructure. At the time of the inspection there was
a projected overspend meaning the LSCB will need increased funding for 2016
if it is to sustain its current level of activity. The recently revised structure
clarifies the responsibilities and reporting arrangements well.
individuals. The board is proactive and takes account of emerging issues well.
The board also seeks information about wider local developments such as the
review of midwife-led services, and ensures it is kept informed and involved in
the consultation process.
requirement for them to complete section 11 audits bi-annually. The challenge
panel was effective and robust in requesting that agencies provide additional
assurances where shortfalls in supporting evidence were identified. The
practitioner survey conducted subsequently found the audit had positively
impacted on respondents understanding of the need to consider the voice of

the child. A good development is a school-friendly version of the audit tool to
enable schools to provide assurance in the future.
Bridge to clarify arrangements for strengthening the front door of childrens
services and the operation of a single point of contact, leading to
improvements. The board maintains close oversight of these developments, for
example, proposed changes were presented to the LSCB in November 2014
enabling board members to appropriately scrutinise and challenge the
proposals.
jointly commissions safeguarding procedures. These take Greater Manchesterwide and local issues and pathways into account appropriately. Policies are
updated regularly but do not yet reflect Salfords new threshold guidance and
the renaming of the single point of contact for childrens services as the
Bridge, nor is this included in Salfords new threshold guidance. This means
that agencies remain unclear about developments and those external to the
local authority do not have accurate information about current referral
arrangements.
LSCB and there are regular and clear reporting arrangements between the two
bodies to report on its progress. The strategy was revised at the same time as
the threshold guidance and published in September 2014. Early help services
are at varied stages of being able to demonstrate impact but plans have been
developed for the board to scrutinise effectiveness on a regular basis.
abuse services as they impact on children and young people. The CSPs subgroup Violence against women (VGWB), which is responsible for the domestic
violence over-arching strategy, currently lacks sufficient focus on children and
young people. To address this, the next LSCB will focus entirely on domestic
abuse to share information and agree future responsibilities and governance
arrangements.
children at risk of child sexual exploitation and children at risk of going missing
is thorough and effective. Greater Manchesters over-arching arrangements to
tackle child sexual exploitation (Project Phoenix) provide the umbrella
framework within which local strategies and services are delivered. The full
board rigorously reviews the local response to child sexual exploitation, paying
particular attention to how well partner agencies identify, refer and support
young people. Intelligence about hotspots is known and shared, although there
is currently no problem profile. Good consideration is given to children placed in
Salford by other local authorities to ensure the notification process is robust.


In these cases, four joint visits by police and childrens social care have taken
place, 11 children have been subject to child sexual exploitation assessments,
and seven children have been involved in group work. Three abduction warning
notices have been served.
through a combination of intensive disruption and awareness-raising activity.
Visits made to licensed premises, taxi-drivers, hotels, off licences and
takeaways ensure local businesses are alerted to risk, intelligence is gathered,
and activity by perpetrators is disrupted. This includes regular visits to potential
hotspots such as local parks and taxi ranks.
been rolled out and are continuing. The recommendations of the report into
child sexual exploitation in Rotherham have been carefully considered, resulting
in the City Director agreeing to fund an independently-led review of historical
cases.
mutilation. Salford has adopted the Greater Manchester strategy and protocols,
which have been widely disseminated. A range of awareness raising activity
and training has been undertaken with partners including health and schools.
To date Salford has convened one child protection conference as a result of
female genital mutilation. The chair is of the view that there is more to do to
ensure cases are referred into the Bridge when concerns are raised.
concerns, disseminating information and sharing good practice between schools
and LSCB partners. Its scope has recently been strengthened with three
representatives from independent schools joining the group. Every school
cluster is represented and this facilitates easy information exchange.
accessed by partner agencies. For example, a recent event hosted at the
Salford Royal hospital trust on female genital mutilation, forced marriage,
honour based violence and child sexual exploitation was very well attended by a
variety of different professionals. Bespoke safeguarding training has been
developed for some Black and Minority ethnic (BME) sections of the community
who have not traditionally accessed training. This has had a good reach and
received positive feedback. Twenty per cent of the safeguarding training
delivered by an umbrella voluntary sector organisation is to BME participants.
Learning is enhanced by the boards annual learning events, most recently in
March 2015 on the unseen child. The board has not yet undertaken a multiagency training needs analysis to inform the future training plan and ensure a
closer alignment between needs and delivery.

Commissioning Group (CCG) and the Health Trust. The CCGs commitment to
safeguarding is exemplified by its incentives to GPs to participate in
safeguarding training. As a result, 98% are trained at level 2 and 85% are
trained at level 3. This has contributed to more GP reports being provided to
child protection conferences. The CCG actively monitors performance in terms
of compliance and quality and this is reported in the LSCB annual report.
equality and diversity sub-group which also reports to the Childrens Trust. The
group considers a range of relevant issues, for example, the standard of
translation services, take up of services by recent immigrants and others such
as Gypsy, Traveller and Romany groups, and awareness of the Equality Act.
There is good cross-referencing between the sub-groups with, for example, the
equality and diversity sub-group being consulted on the anti-bullying strategy.
being increasingly applied so that voluntary organisations ensure they meet
minimum safeguarding standards.
a task and finish group to achieve this. Surveys conducted before and after a
publicity campaign aimed at agencies showed an awareness increase from 55%
to 77% of respondents. There has been a small increase in referrals regarding
private fostering, and sustaining awareness has been built in by incorporating a
question relating to this within every early help assessment.
variety of forums, are fed into the LSCB. The group has overseen the
introduction of a child-friendly software tool to enable children and young
people to express their views. This is being rolled out incrementally in childrens
social care from January 2015 so it is too early to see its impact but early signs
are positive. Other videos about the value of consulting with children and young
people have been developed and made accessible through the LSCB website.
Two young people act as safeguarding representatives on the Youth Council.
The group also successfully embedded Hear by Right standards within the
section 11 audit process. The independent chair has plans to meet directly with
young people but has not done so yet. Until very recently the sub-group met
during office hours, but now meets outside of school hours to enable young
people to participate. Hearing directly from children and young people remains
a priority for the board.
practitioners. This group also helps to deliver key messages from the board to
their colleagues and is a popular and easy way for practitioners to engage
directly with board priorities. The LSCB has had a lay member for some time
and plans are in place to extend his contribution.

benefit from another kind of in-depth review to generate multi-agency learning,
are carefully considered by a well-attended SCR sub-group; all key decisions
are ratified by the independent chair. The scope of the sub-group means it
performs the function of undertaking multi-agency audits of individual cases,
and there is wide dissemination of learning and themes. Learning from the
Child/Adult 15 case review, which was shared with practitioners, can be seen
in, for example, the development of accreditation for interpreting services used
in Salford. The board considers the progress of action plans at each meeting
and this promotes transparency and swift completion of actions. The absence of
a representative from the police at the presentation from the independent
author of the Child N SCR to the sub-group in February 2015 was promptly
followed up by the independent chair, resulting in an internal review and
agreement to revise the GMP single action plan.
childrens home located in this local authority, which is judged to be
outstanding, and the LSCB. The board receives regular reports from the home
including details of restraints. A member of the LSCB sits on the homes
management committee and its own scrutiny panel which, for example, reviews
CCTV footage to provide external oversight of incidents and provides additional
assurance that children and young people are being safeguarded in the home.
and the data is shared with the Childrens Trust. However, the board has
struggled to develop consistent performance reporting that is clear, includes
trends, and supports scrutiny. The current dataset is of limited use and
intermittent gaps in information inhibit the LSCBs ability to assure itself of
performance regarding practice in childrens social care. For example, in one
report, four measures relating to children in need were blank. Devising an
appropriate performance report has been complicated by attempts to
incorporate the recently-developed Greater Manchester Safeguarding dataset
which presents additional difficulties in collection and analysis, and is not
sufficiently focused on local need. As a consequence, the board has revised its
performance reporting arrangements by supplementing the core childrens
services dataset with performance reports aligned to its priorities. This is a very
recent development but performance reporting for the next board demonstrates
valuable data presented well. The board undertakes one or two multi-agency
audits a year to inform practice and this helps compensate for the difficulties in
developing a consistent performance report, but more could be done in this
area.
underpinning data and limited analysis. Despite this, the board has a clear
business plan based on its priorities and progress is regularly considered.
Activity is underway to ensure that the next annual report is more detailed, is
sufficiently analytical about past achievements, and sets out a clear rationale
for future priorities. A key challenge for the boards planning are the shortfalls

in the current JSNA which is incomplete with respect to safeguarding data and
child population ethnicity and diversity data. The board is updated in detail
about the work of the local authority designated officer (LADO), the child death
overview panel (CDOP) and the progress made by looked after children, and
provides good scrutiny and challenge in these areas.
authorities. It has run a safe sleeping campaign for the past three years,
concluding in July 2014. There has been a reduction in the number of child
deaths normally associated with the risks around safe sleeping, with only 2
such deaths in 2013-14. The Care Quality Commission inspection of
safeguarding services recommended that health services should review care
pathways when young people attend the emergency department following selfharm. In Salford, the practical response has been to link this into the emotional
health strategy within schools and this is overseen by the Childrens Trust.
emotional health and well-being strategy. The SCR sub-group has identified
several cases where self-harm is a factor and the CQC inspection of health
safeguarding services recommended a review of care pathways when young
people attend the emergency department following self-harm. A play on selfharm commissioned by the CCG performed in schools in March 2014 to
approximately a thousand pupils received extremely positive feedback from the
young people. Links have recently been made between the board and public
healths local and Greater Manchester suicide prevention groups. However,
mutual awareness of what activity is underway in the realms of public health
across Greater Manchester, public health locally, and activity driven by the LSCB
and the CQC inspection action plan remain relatively new. This requires further
consideration with a view to developing a cohesive strategy, avoiding
duplication of effort, and ensuring that impact is measured.
strategy, and the draft strategy has been commented on by the independent
chair. This illustrates the impact of the board in progressing issues which have
been under-developed.
meetings, although a report explaining the reasons for the shortfall in their
attendance at child protection conferences has been considered previously.
to individuals who are vulnerable to messages of violent extremism .These
documents are awaiting sign off by the LSCB but have been agreed in principle.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of 10 of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Deputy lead inspector: Emmy Tomsett
Team inspectors: Wendy Ghaffar, Mike Ferguson, Brenda McLaughlin, Gary Lamb,
Chris Luke, Dick OBrien, Elaine Clinton
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams, Simone White


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015

