Shropshire
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 September 2017 to 5 October 2017
Report published: 24 November 2017

Childrens services in Shropshire are good

Good

permanence

Requires improvement to
be good


Good


Requires improvement to
be good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services to safeguard children in Shropshire are good. Since the last inspection in
members and partner agencies, has systematically developed and improved services
for children. Leaders have a good understanding of their roles and communities. This
has helped to consolidate and build effective partnerships to address key local issues.
A particular focus on early help services for children who need help and protection or
are at risk of child sexual exploitation, neglect and/or domestic abuse has led to
strong operational practice in these areas, supported by a keen culture of learning
and improvement.
Children and their families benefit from an extensive range of well-coordinated,
multi-agency help and support, including early help services. For most children,
strong social work practice enables them to achieve positive outcomes. Senior
leaders, managers, staff and partner agencies work well together to ensure that
services are continuously improved over time. They are ambitious in their drive to
make sure that all childrens needs are met well and that their safety and welfare are
promoted. The recruitment of a number of senior managers in the last 18 months
has led to a reinvigorated focus on practice improvement in safeguarding children
and more recent practice improvement in looked after children teams and the care
leavers service.
Good understanding by partner agencies of the thresholds for access to childrens
social care means that most referrals are appropriate and timely. Children at risk of
immediate harm receive a good response. Strategy discussions take place promptly
and include relevant agencies, resulting in appropriate outcomes. Partner agencies
respond robustly to concerns where children are exposed to domestic abuse,
parental substance misuse and parental poor mental health. Children in need and
child protection services support families well. Child protection conferences are well
attended and there is a strong focus on achieving positive outcomes for children.
Social workers know the children with whom they are working well. They use a wide
range of creative and effective direct work to understand the views and
circumstances of children. The majority of assessments are timely and of good
quality. Most plans are child focused and reviewed regularly.
Inspectors found that some social work practice needs to improve further. For
example, some assessments and plans require more depth and detail, case recording
is not comprehensive and up to date for all children, and management oversight of
the timeliness of contacts in the Compass service could be enhanced. Inspectors
found that, for a few 16- and 17-year-old homeless young people, some assessments
were not timely enough. While bed and breakfast accommodation was used
inappropriately, this was for very few children.
Arrangements for identifying and responding to children at risk of sexual exploitation
or going missing from home, school or care are good, with effective strategic and


operational arrangements in place to ensure a multi-agency response to safeguard
all children.
Practice improvements are supported well by comprehensive performance
information that enables effective monitoring. The robust quality assurance
framework and good use of audits and peer reviews contribute effectively to
performance information and practice improvements. Managers know very well the
strengths and weaknesses of their services, and accurately assess their own
performance. Management oversight and supervision of social work practice require
further strengthening so that all children benefit from effective and timely decisionmaking and planning, particularly for permanence. While social work recruitment and
retention have been a challenge, senior leaders and elected members have robustly
supported building up a strong, trained workforce to meet the high-quality social
work practice expected by the local authority.
Children become looked after when risks escalate, mostly in a planned way and
when it is in their best interests. Innovative and effective edge-of-care services help
to make sure that children become looked after only when this is needed. Most
children return home with plans to provide appropriate support.
Most children live with suitably experienced foster carers who support them well and
provide stability and access to a wide range of activities. Social workers visit children
regularly and know them well, although some children looked after have had too
many changes of social worker. Children see their families regularly, but family
contact is not considered carefully enough for all children. Childrens achievements
are celebrated and they participate in the corporate parenting panel and service
developments.
Assessments and care planning for children looked after, particularly to achieve
permanence, require more focus so that all children, including those who are longterm fostered, are supported to achieve timely and positive outcomes. The local
authority is already working on this. Most children looked after achieve well in primary
school and make good progress to narrow the gap with their peers at secondary
school. The virtual school is improving the quality of personal education plans, but
targets in these plans are not specific enough.
Adoption is a strength. Children who need adoption are matched well and placed
very quickly with adopters. Prospective adopters are assessed and trained to a high
standard. The quality of post-adoption support is exceptional.
Most care leavers are in regular contact with their personal adviser and live in
suitable accommodation. While there are clear plans to improve support for
independent living, these have been slow to develop. More care leavers are staying
in education, employment or training immediately after they reach 18, but this figure
declines for older care leavers. Further work is required to provide more
apprenticeships, to improve participation of care leavers in their planning and in
service developments, and to ensure that detailed information about their
entitlements is available.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two childrens homes. Two were judged to be good
in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for safeguarding and looked
after children was in March 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate
for safeguarding children and good for children looked after.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services has been in post since April 2013.
 The chief executive has been in post since November 2012.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
December 2016.
 The local authority has commissioned a range of external services across
childrens social care and early help. These services include:
 recently recommissioned overnight short breaks and community support for
children with a disability
 a specialist service to support children who have disabilities and/or special
educational needs and/or autism
 an independent visitor and an independent advocacy service for children
looked after
 residential care for children and young people
 adopter and foster carer recruitment and some post-adoption services
 a support service for Shropshires young carers
 a commissioned service that delivers targeted one-to-one early help family
support, along with financial support to a local youth association that delivers
infrastructure support and advice, including childrens safeguarding training,
to all voluntary sector youth provision across Shropshire
 a public health nursing service (including health visiting and school nursing).
 The local authority uses a relationship-based practice model of social work. A risk
assessment framework to complement the model has been introduced recently.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


This is designed to optimise the social workers role to appropriately identify and
respond to risk.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 59,386 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Shropshire. This is 19% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 13% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic group of children and young people in the area is
Mixed ethnicity, which accounts for 2%.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 4% (the national average is 21%)
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 11 September 2017, 1,208 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 11 September 2017, 194 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 33 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 240
(40 per 10,000 children) as at 31 March 2017.
 At 11 September 2017, two children were living in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is no change from the situation at 31 March 2017.
 In the two years before this inspection, five serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted and one serious case review was completed.
 There was one serious case review ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 11 September 2017, 318 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 54 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 291 (49 per
authority area


 one was living in a residential special school,3 and was living out of the local
authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 seven children were adopted
 three children became subjects of special guardianship orders
be looked after
 six children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and was living in a house of
multiple occupancy.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Recommendations

Ensure that a clear system is established to enhance management oversight
of initial contacts, so as to avoid any delays and to monitor timeliness and
effectiveness.


Ensure that all children have information added to their electronic records,
regardless of the level of concern, particularly for domestic abuse level one
notifications, and that records completed by the emergency duty team are
immediate.


Ensure that all brother and sister groups have a case record as a result of a
contact received in the Compass service.


Ensure that assessments for children looked after and their families are
comprehensive and analytical, to inform timely care plans and decisionmaking effectively.


Ensure that all plans, including children in need plans, child protection plans,
care plans and pathway plans, have clear overall objectives and timely specific
actions.


Ensure that effective management oversight and case supervision influence
and ensure the achievement of childrens plans.


Ensure that arrangements for permanence planning are robust and that
permanence plans progress within the childs timescale, to avoid children
experiencing delays.


Ensure that children who are looked after have assessed contact agreements
with their families that are sufficiently detailed and ensure that contact
supervisors are specifically trained in supervision.


Improve childrens engagement and participation, and ensure that the
information shared and the numbers of children participating in their child
protection conferences are collated for future learning and service delivery.


Ensure that care leavers have the opportunity to access apprenticeships to
increase their opportunities for education, employment and training.


Improve the arrangements for preparing care leavers for independent living,
ensuring that they have appropriate opportunities for participation and that
they know what support they can expect under the Shropshire Pledge.


Ensure that all homeless young people aged 16 and 17 years are offered
appropriate accommodation.


Summary for children and young people
 Social workers in Shropshire are working hard to keep children safe. They work
with other staff in health, education and the police services to make sure that
children are listened to and, where children have concerns or are not being
looked after properly, they try to make childrens lives better.
 If a child is at risk of sexual exploitation or goes missing from home, social
workers respond quickly to provide them and their families with help and support.
 When parents have difficulties in looking after their children, social workers try to
make sure that children can remain safely with their family. If this is not possible,
children are able to live with other families who make sure that they are cared for
well.
 Social workers try to make sure that, where possible, children return home as
quickly as possible. In some cases, social workers need to do more to ensure that
there is enough help and support to make the return home successful.
 If a child needs a new permanent family because they cannot live at home, this
happens quickly. If children need to stay with foster parents for a long time,
decisions to confirm this as a permanent arrangement need to be made more
quickly so that children understand what is going to happen as early as possible.
 Some children who are looked after by Shropshire have experienced too many
changes in social worker, and this means that it is more difficult to make a
relationship with their social worker. The authority is working hard to make this
better.
 When young people leave care, the authority makes sure that they have a
suitable place to live. More needs to be done to ensure that young people also
have more chances to improve their lives by staying in education, having a job,
being an apprentice or being trained for a job.
 When a young person is ready to live on their own, more help and support are
needed to make sure that they are well prepared. The local authority needs to do
more to ensure that care leavers know what help they are entitled to after they
leave care.
 Shropshire celebrates the achievements of children and young people in care.
Young people say that they enjoy this, and many consider their social workers
and personal advisers to be supportive. The authority could do more to hear and
listen to the views of young people leaving care.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Good

Summary
Services to safeguard children are good. Children and their families benefit from an
extensive range of well-coordinated, multi-agency support, including early help
services, childrens centres and targeted youth services. These are helping to
support children and families at the earliest opportunity. Arrangements to escalate
childrens cases to social care when risks increase are robust.
A good understanding of the thresholds for access to childrens social care means
that most referrals from partner agencies are appropriate and timely. The multiagency Compass service ensures a robust and prompt response to immediate
concerns. However, some contacts can lead to delays when parental consent has
not been obtained or more information is needed. Children at risk of immediate
harm are responded to well. Strategy discussions take place promptly and include
relevant agencies and result in appropriate outcomes. Partner agencies attend
timely child protection conferences where there is a strong focus on achieving
outcomes for children.
The majority of assessments are timely and of good quality. They are analytical
and supported by chronologies. However, early help assessments do not always
focus enough on the childs lived experience and diversity. Social workers know the
children with whom they are working well. They use a wide range of creative and
effective direct work to understand the views and circumstances of children. Most
plans are child focused and reviewed regularly. A small number of plans are
lengthy, and are not specific enough for families to understand what is required of
them. Most childrens records are up to date. For a small number of children,
recording does not provide an up-to-date overview of their circumstances.
The local authority responds robustly to concerns where children are exposed to
domestic abuse, parental substance misuse and/or parental poor mental health.
Arrangements for identifying and responding to children at risk of sexual
exploitation or going missing from home or school are good, with effective multiagency responses.
Assessments of young people aged 16 and 17 years who present as homeless are
not always timely enough, resulting in the provision of appropriate accommodation
not being considered quickly enough for a very small number of young people.
Inappropriate bed and breakfast placements are commissioned, but for very few
young people.
The management of and response to allegations against people who work with
children are timely and effective, with appropriate actions taken to safeguard
children in Shropshire.


Inspection findings

The quality of the local authoritys safeguarding practice is good. Children and
their families receive a prompt and effective service when information
suggests that they require help and support.


Social workers see children regularly and alone. They engage in direct work
and provide highly effective support to children in need of help and protection.
Social workers are confident and skilled practitioners, and they develop
meaningful relationships with children. Inspectors saw some excellent
examples of imaginative ways of using a range of tools to elicit childrens
views, wishes and feelings.


Children have access to well-structured and timely early help services,
provided by a wide range of professionals. Consequently, children are being
protected from harm. The pathway into targeted early help provision is clear.
Early help social workers provide consultation with professionals and offer
advice, help and support. They also attend early help professionals meetings
where necessary. Weekly early help professionals meetings act as a key
transfer point for discussion. As a result, children and their families are offered
help when needs and concerns are first identified, with effective escalation to
statutory services if required.


A coherent strategy underpins early help services. Partners regularly attend
monthly performance meetings with the local authority and feel engaged with
service planning and delivery. Comprehensive data and performance reports
detail the positive impact of early help, with many families moving on to
closure and avoiding being stepped up to statutory intervention.


A web-based electronic information sharing system supports multi-agency
partnership working. A comprehensive assessment framework ensures a
holistic focus on the needs of all family members and measures outcomes.
Children and families also benefit from parenting and child support from
childrens centres, supplemented by a commissioned service providing direct
work with children. However, in terms of quality, some early help assessments
focus too much on the needs of parents. The voice of the child is not
consistently included and lacks effective analysis. The local authority
recognises that there is more to do to strengthen these assessments and early
help plans, and to provide relevant training to upskill partners.


Thresholds are well established and applied consistently, resulting in
proportionate action to protect children. An effective and mostly timely
response is provided when concerns for children are raised with the Compass
service, which is where all enquiries are received about concerns for the
welfare or protection of children and young people. While case recording was
up to date, only information for the eldest child in a sibling group is recorded
on concerns forms, so information about any younger brothers and sisters is


not separately recorded or available for future reference on the electronic
system. (Recommendation)

Consent to share information is understood well and appropriately sought in
the majority of cases seen by inspectors. In a small number of cases, some
delays occur when parental consent and/or more information is needed for
lower-level concerns but has not been sought already by the referrer. The
impact of this for children is that there is sometimes a delay in progressing a
contact and in determining the threshold for a referral. Inspectors saw
evidence of appropriate management oversight and decision-making within
the Compass team. However, a clearer, more structured system would ensure
tighter monitoring of any future delays for children and their families.
(Recommendation)


When consent is obtained and all relevant partner agency information has
been received, effective decision-making means that cases are closed,
transferred to early help or progressed to a referral when a social work
assessment is identified.


Immediate safeguarding concerns are recognised without delay and promptly
progressed by the Compass team. Relevant partners and a team manager
from the assessment team attend strategy discussions that are timely and
result in swift actions and outcomes. Transfer to an identified allocated social
worker is prompt. Child protection enquiries are of a good standard. Social
workers see children alone, multi-agency checks are thorough and there is a
clear analysis of risks, resulting in proportionate decisions leading to child
protection conferences when necessary.


Child protection conferences are timely. They are sensitively and effectively
chaired and well attended, and they facilitate effective information sharing
and engagement by partner agencies. Conference chairs use a red, amber and
green (RAG) rating of practice following case conferences. This provides
additional management oversight and feedback to social workers, and leads to
improvements in practice.


When concerns do not meet the threshold for child protection, good
partnership working leads to effective assessments and support under children
in need arrangements. Effective partnership working results in positive
outcomes for most children. The majority of statutory assessments are timely
and of good quality. They include family histories and research. They also
identify risks, manage strengths and are supported by comprehensive and upto-date chronologies. Diversity issues are not always well considered or
detailed. For example, ethnicity is recorded, but other issues are not always
fully explored. In most cases, assessments lead to child-specific care plans.
Children who are subject to child in need or child protection plans have their
plans reviewed regularly. A robust and clear protocol for consideration of risks
and concerns, or step up or step down arrangements, ensures that
consideration is given at each review so that children are safe and receive the


most appropriate intervention. A small number of plans are too long. They
contain generic or unrealistic actions with unclear timescales. The use of the
terms ongoing and to be reviewed at core group does not assist families or
professionals to understand the timescales in which change must occur for the
child. (Recommendation)

Disabled children receive comprehensive social work assessments, with
specialist support provided by social workers in the disabled childrens team.
When ongoing needs are identified, these children receive a highly effective
and proportionate service from experienced social workers who recognise
childrens support needs while protecting them from harm.


Management oversight is clearly evident through regular and effective formal
supervision. Most supervision records contain reflection on practice, with clear
actions for social workers to progress. However, the quality of these records in
some of the case management teams is not as clear in terms of monitoring
childrens plans and progressing to achieve outcomes effectively.


The number of children subject to child protection plans at the time of the
inspection (194) has been reduced significantly since March 2016 (266). All
child protection plans that have been in place for nine months are robustly
monitored by senior managers. This additional level of scrutiny and evaluation
makes sure that there are no delays in planning for children where changes
are not sustained and children remain at continued risk of harm.


The emergency duty team provides an effective out of office hours response,
but childrens records are not always immediately updated. This means that
up-to-date information is not available for staff if they need to make urgent
decisions.


Arrangements for the identification, intervention and management of
significant issues of harm by adults in formal settings such as multi-agency
risk assessment conferences (MARAC) and multi-agency public protection
arrangements (MAPPA) are robust. Domestic abuse notifications are received
and considered daily by the multi-agency domestic abuse triage meeting in
the Compass service, consistently attended by a wide range of key partners.
Recent changes to commissioning arrangements for health colleagues are
designed to enable them to attend on a regular basis from November 2017,
giving a more robust contribution to the decision-making to protect children.
However, there is no recording on childrens files of lower-level concerns,
where the child is not known to the local authority. This affects the local
authoritys ability to provide a comprehensive chronology from the earliest
concern and to inform future decision-making.


Children who go missing from home or are at risk of child sexual exploitation
are identified quickly by effective partnership working in Compass and receive
a timely assessment. Specialist workers are allocated promptly and return
home interviews and child sexual exploitation risk screening tools are swiftly


completed. Once needs are identified, children and families are offered a
range of services. Cases are reviewed regularly at well-attended monthly
panels with clear actions to reduce risks for children. Rigorous arrangements
trace children who go missing from education.

A clear joint working protocol with partners supports effective practice and
identification of vulnerable children and young people who may be at risk of
radicalisation. All schools are aware of the Prevent duty and the training
available, and the vast majority of schools have undertaken workshops to
raise awareness of Prevent (WRAP) training. The Prevent duty is a
mandatory part of multi-agency safeguarding training. Guidance and training
focused on forced marriage and female genital mutilation also ensure that the
workforce maintains up-to-date knowledge to protect vulnerable children.
These sensitive topics are kept live, despite the low incidence within the local
authority area.


Social workers undertake appropriate assessments for homeless 16- and 17year-olds. However, they are not always timely enough, meaning that, when
suitable alternative accommodation is necessary, any decision that a young
person should become looked after is not always considered as quickly as
possible. A small number of young people in the last year have been placed
inappropriately in bed and breakfast accommodation until more permanent
arrangements could be made. (Recommendation)


Children at risk of harm from professionals who care and work with them are
protected well and in a timely manner. The local authority has a
comprehensive model of tracking, monitoring and analysing data to inform
future training and awareness raising for partners.


Private fostering arrangements are assessed in a timely way, although
improvements to initial notifications to the fostering service would improve the
timeliness further. A suitability forum meets to consider whether private
fostering arrangements are appropriate. When children are assessed as
requiring ongoing child in need support, a childrens social worker is allocated
promptly.


Arrangements for children to participate in their child protection case
conferences are weak. Some children are supported to contribute to their
plans, or to attend their meetings, and a commissioned advocacy service is
available. However, the local authority does not capture specific data or
information around childrens participation in case conferences to inform
future service delivery or learning. (Recommendation)


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement
to be good

Summary
Decisions to look after children and young people are mostly timely, planned and
made in their best interests. The use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) is well
embedded. In a very small number of cases, permanence care plans are not clear
enough. Strong and effective edge of care services to prevent children becoming
looked after are in place. Some children return home without thorough enough
plans to ensure appropriate support.
Most social workers visit children regularly and know them well, although some
children have had too many changes of social worker. Assessments of some
childrens needs lack depth. Care planning requires more detail and management
oversight to ensure timely outcomes for children. Independent reviewing officers
(IROs) regularly review care plans, and more robust and recent scrutiny is
beginning to improve practice, particularly for permanence. Inspectors found that
some children wait too long to have long-term fostering formally agreed.
Effective multi-agency services and responses are in place for children who
experience risks associated with offending, misusing drugs or alcohol, being
sexually exploited or going missing. Most children live in stable foster homes and
have access to a wide range of activities. Children see their families regularly, but
assessments and contact agreements do not evidence careful enough
consideration of childrens needs for contact. Childrens achievements are
appropriately celebrated, and they participate in the corporate parenting panel and
service developments.
Most children looked after go to good or better schools and attend well. They
achieve well in primary school and make good progress to narrow the gap with
their peers in secondary school. The virtual school is improving the quality of their
education plans, but targets in these plans are not specific enough.
Adoption is a strength. Children who need adoption are well matched and placed
very quickly with adopters. Prospective adopters are assessed and trained to a
high standard. The quality of post-adoption support is exceptional.
Most care leavers are in regular contact with their personal adviser, and live in
suitable accommodation where they are safe. Improvements to the support
provided for independent living are in place, but have been slow to develop. More
care leavers are staying in education, employment or training immediately after
they reach 18, but the proportion declines for older care leavers. Further work is
needed to provide more apprenticeships, to improve participation of care leavers in
their planning and service developments and to ensure that detailed information
about their entitlements is available.


Inspection findings

Children become looked after when they need to be, in a planned and mostly
timely way, and in response to escalating risks. Most assessments help to
inform correct decision-making. A small number of assessments do not always
contain enough detail so that plans for children to be looked after are
sufficiently purposeful and clear enough, particularly for young babies.


The use of the Public Law Outline (PLO) is well established. Legal planning
meetings are held regularly and chaired by a senior manager. Letters before
proceedings meetings enable concerns to be shared with families and to
ensure that they are encouraged to access legal advice and advocacy. The
local authority has developed a good reputation for bringing cases to court in
a timely way. The quality of court work is well thought of by the courts and
the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass).
Training, readily available legal advice and the support of a principal social
worker mean that most social workers feel well supported when working
within legal proceedings. In a small number of cases, inspectors saw
permanence plans that were not sufficiently clear or formulated soon enough,
or that were changed during the course of proceedings. The local authority is
fully sighted on these issues and has strengthened senior management
oversight and legal planning meetings to make sure that plans are robust.


Services for children who need permanence, but for whom adoption is not
appropriate, are not yet consistent enough. The service is developing a
permanence tracker. This includes all children who have a permanence plan,
with the aim of strengthening senior and team management oversight and the
grip on permanence activity other than adoption. This is a positive step, but it
is not yet fully in place.


For children who cannot live with their immediate family, social workers
identify connected persons as soon as possible. Assessments of connected
persons are completed in a timely way and to a good standard. The local
authority has increased the number of special guardianship orders (SGOs)
over the past year. In the majority of cases looked at by inspectors, there was
timely and concerted action to support connected carers in securing an SGO.
Children subject to SGOs are making significant progress emotionally, socially
and developmentally from their starting points.


Sound assessments and multi-agency decision-making about most children
who could return home result in successful reunification. Very effective edge
of care services, including short breaks, outreach services and family group
conferences, prevent children from becoming looked after and support
children returning home. Some children, particularly older young people,
return home without a robust enough assessment and support plan to ensure
that arrangements are appropriate and sustainable.



Many children enjoy positive relationships with their social workers, who see
them alone and undertake purposeful work with them to understand their
wishes and feelings. However, inspectors saw that caseloads remain high for
some social workers. Children who met inspectors had experienced changes in
social workers, which affected the quality of their relationships and the
knowledge that social workers had about them.


The local authoritys strategy to support schools in protecting children from
bullying, including on social media, is comprehensive. Work centres on the
healthy child programme and extends the role of the personal, social, health
and economic (PSHE) education adviser to public health. Resources for
schools are good, and include e-safety procedures, policies for acceptable
information technology use and resources specifically designed to combat
child sexual exploitation. Good use is also made of the well-designed wholeschool Respect yourself resource pack, the Digital romance research project
and the Grooming  it could happen to you resource pack.


Multi-agency partners respond appropriately to children who experience risks
associated with offending, misusing drugs or alcohol, being sexually exploited
or going missing. Effective plans help to reduce both the risk of harm and the
actual harm for the vast majority of these vulnerable children. Children receive
timely return home interviews when they have been missing. Where children
have repeatedly gone missing and are exposed to increased risks, appropriate
protective action is taken. However, risks associated with going missing are
not always fully analysed, as management comments are not evident on all
return home interview records to provide oversight and assurance that
children are safeguarded appropriately.


Most childrens cases seen by inspectors have regular health assessments, but
the system and data to support this process are not robust enough, and a few
childrens health assessments are delayed. This has been challenged by the
corporate parenting panel and is being closely monitored to ensure that
performance is overseen and information about childrens health needs is
comprehensive.


Shropshires children looked after mental health practitioner provides a valued
service for assessment, consultancy and training of staff and carers. This
service builds resilience and the capacity to offer therapeutic parenting and
care.


Children looked after attend school regularly, especially at primary level. Most
children attend schools judged to be good or better, both in and out of the
county. Only a few children looked after attend the local authoritys very
effective alternative provision. When they do so, they remain registered with
their original school. Carefully assessed and supported in the alternative
school, the vast majority return successfully to their original school within a
term. The virtual school provides effective support and increasingly vigorous
oversight to schools to account for their use of pupil premium funding to


support the educational progress of children looked after. However, too many
personal education plans have targets that are neither specific nor
measurable. The virtual school team rightly sees that this is an area for
development. Despite this, children looked after make better progress than
those nationally in most measures at key stage 1 and key stage 2. They
achieve marginally less well at key stage 4, but the differences are not
significant.

Rigorous arrangements trace children who go missing from education.
Educational welfare officers (EWOs) are in close contact with all the schools
and monitor attendance continuously. This means that EWOs are able to preemptively identify children who are likely to go missing.


Children are supported to enjoy a range of social, educational and recreational
opportunities. This was confirmed by what they told inspectors, and in their
assessments and plans.


The vast majority of children live in stable foster homes where their foster
carers provide positive support and care, and advocate for them. Placements
for brothers and sisters together are considered carefully and provided, where
they are available and in the childrens best interests. The local authority
recognises that, for children who have more complex and challenging needs,
the range and choice of placements are not always available.


The local authority has introduced a disruption panel to improve sufficiency
and support placement stability. This panel considers potential issues arising
in more fragile placements and what further support and help foster carers
might require, particularly for those experiencing difficulties in caring for older
children. A strategic priority for the service is to recruit more foster carers.
This is based on the knowledge and the projections about children who need
to be looked after.


The local authority recognises that more needs to be done so that children
who are long-term fostered have their care confirmed by formal decisionmaking about permanence, and so that any uncertainty that they may
experience while waiting for a decision is minimised. In a small number of
cases, there was some drift and delay for children waiting to be found longterm carers, and a greater focus on purposeful and targeted family finding is
required. Three life-story workers have developed positive skills in life-history
work that sensitively helps children to understand their lives. This service is
mainly provided for children whose plan is adoption, and is not as available for
those with other permanence care plans.


Most assessments, while undertaken regularly for reviews, are not sufficiently
detailed in terms of considering all relevant information, critical evaluation and
analysis, although a small number of excellent childrens assessments were
seen by inspectors. Care plans are not clear enough, and actions lack the
detail needed in order to progress overarching goals. Management oversight


does not systematically influence and improve the quality of assessments or
care plans. This results in delays to achieve actions that would improve
outcomes for children.

Most statutory reviews are held regularly. Additionally, multi-agency meetings
take place between statutory reviews. While these meetings are useful,
managers do not have oversight of them, so they are not yet used to good
enough effect to progress plans. The independent reviewing service has
recently established a red, amber and green (RAG) rating escalation process
to introduce more robust scrutiny and to address less effective care planning.
In most cases where concerns are escalated, this results in a positive impact
for children. This escalation process is beginning to improve practice,
particularly in relation to permanence planning for children who do not have
an adoption care plan. (Recommendation)


While family contact for children is promoted and most children see their
families, assessments do not evidence careful enough consideration of
childrens contact needs. Most contact agreements seen by inspectors did not
sufficiently set out the details of practical arrangements, the focus for the
contact or its outcomes. Contact supervisors are not specifically trained in
supervision. The local authority already had plans to review this service, but
this had not happened by the time of the inspection. (Recommendation)


Most children placed out of area live in suitable accommodation which meets
their needs. In cases seen by inspectors, children had timely access to
education and health services. The local authority has an effective system to
notify authorities when and where children are placed in their area. The local
authority also ensures an effective and rigorous partnership response to the
high number of children looked after who are placed by other local authorities
in Shropshire (315 on 31 March 2016).


The fostering service is well managed, thorough and compliant with
regulations. Foster carers are positive about the support that they receive
from their support workers and receive regular visits. A comprehensive range
of training and development opportunities is available for foster carers,
including connected persons. Foster carers spoken to by inspectors were very
positive about the quality of training and the impact that it had made on their
confidence and skills as carers.


Case records are up to date but, for many children, these need to be more
purposeful and clear about the lived experience of the child. For example,
when children are visited, the purpose of the visit is not always clear.


Through the Children in Care Council (CiCC), children have engaged in wider
issues about corporate parenting. The local authority has begun to respond to
the CiCCs suggestions, including free leisure and bus passes. This work has
not been completed, so impact is not evident. Children and social workers
spoke positively to inspectors about the recent celebration event, which


children enjoyed and at which they received certificates to recognise their
achievements.

Children know how to complain, and managers carefully consider the learning
from complaints to improve practice. The local authoritys commissioned
advocacy and independent visitor service is well established. Access to this
service is considered in statutory reviews of children looked after. Advocates
have good links with childrens homes, including children placed out of area.
However, children in fostering placements are less well informed about
advocacy.


Social workers do not always fully explore or consider diversity issues for all
children. For example, not enough consideration is given to social deprivation,
isolation in a rural community, recognition of ethnicity and their impact on
childrens lived experience. The local authority recognises this and has taken
steps to improve it. For example, a specialist social work post for
unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people has been created and a process
has been established to fully consider deprivation of liberty for those children
for whom this is relevant.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good.


Achieving adoption for children is both a priority and a strength. Children for
whom adoption is the best outcome benefit from robust planning and
decision-making, which means that adoption proceeds very quickly. The
quality of preparation for adopters and post-adoption support is strong. This
means that children achieve timely permanence with well-prepared and
supported adoptive families.


An established joint adoption service (JAS) covers Shropshire and Telford and
Wrekin. The service is stable, experienced and well led, which means that the
staff know children and adopters well. An effective early alert and tracking
system for children who require adoption is regularly monitored, reviewed and
challenged by senior managers. A permanence coordinator provides robust
and tenacious tracking of cases, undertakes family finding and provides advice
and support to childrens social workers to write childrens permanence
reports. The local authority is further enhancing practice to incorporate all
children who require permanence and to strengthen senior management
oversight. Regular JAS management board meetings show a determined focus
on performance and continuous improvement.


Fifteen children were adopted in 201617 and 22 in 201516. The local
authority is aware that numbers of adoptions are decreasing, but performance
is still close to national levels. To improve practice, the local authority is
reshaping the wider permanence planning across the service, and also


regionally, to ensure that it is fully effective for all children who require
permanence, not just for adoption.

The most recently published adoption scorecard for 2013 to 2016 shows that
Shropshire is one of the highest performing local authorities in England for
speed of adoption. For children being adopted, the time between a child
entering care and that child moving in with their adoptive family was, on
average, 426 days. This performance matches the government threshold of
performance in the last 12 months exceeds this considerably, at 350 days.
The average time between the local authority receiving court authority to
place a child and its matching the child to an adoptive placement is
exceptionally quick at 62 days, which exceeds the government threshold by


Child permanence reports are child centred, detailed and sensitively written,
showing full consideration of alternative options to adoption. Children are well
prepared for adoption, and adopters spoken to by inspectors were all fully
involved in planning. Matching is strong, with child appreciation meetings held
involving key professionals along with the foster carer and adopters to share
information prior to the matching panel. These meetings were introduced
earlier this year to strengthen the matching process, and were partly informed
by the learning from the one adoption breakdown that there has been in
recent years. This means that adopters are fully informed about children by all
the people involved in their lives.


Life-story books are child centred and colourful, with plenty of photographs.
They tell childrens stories in an age-appropriate way. Social workers write
later-life letters in a clear and honest way, and these provide a sensitive
account of the childs story. In addition, the adoption social worker writes a
short letter which provides a factual summary and details of how to request
access to records and post-adoption support. This means that adopted adults
have clear information about their entitlements.


Brothers and sisters are placed together when this is in their best interests. Of
the 15 adoption orders made in 201617, there were five sibling groups, with
ages of children ranging from under one to six. At the time of the inspection,
two adoption orders had been made since April 2017. Five children are waiting
for adoption, with active family finding taking place. A further 15 children are
at the early onset of care proceedings where adoption is the care plan. In the
last 12 months, eight children who had an adoption plan have had these
changed. Cases sampled by inspectors all demonstrate that this was
appropriate action. For example, birth parents circumstances had changed or
improved, leading to informed changes to the childs permanence plan.


Fostering to adopt is routinely discussed as part of the assessment of
prospective adopters. Although there has been only one placement in the last


future. The local authority recognises that this helps children to achieve early
permanence, therefore it intends to increase the use of fostering to adopt in
the future.

Adopters are recruited, prepared and trained to a high standard. Adopters
spoken to during the inspection confirmed that they were positive about the
standard of communication, preparation, training and support, and would
recommend the JAS to anyone who wanted to adopt. In all cases looked at,
there was evidence of timely and purposeful visits to prospective adopters to
progress the assessment, and statutory timescales were met.


The standard of prospective adopter reports is high. They are undertaken in
partnership with adopters, cover diversity issues well, and provide an
evaluative and insightful summary of the potential adopters social history,
views and aspirations, with relevant research and quotes from the adopters
used to good effect.


The adoption recruitment strategy is flexible, to allow for changes, and is
based on the current and predicted numbers of children in care who are likely
to require adoption. A recent focus has been on sibling groups and older
children. This year, 33 adopter households were approved, which is an
increase from 27 last year. At the time of the inspection, 24 adopters were
waiting for a match and seven were linked to children. Timely and effective
practice to match adopters with children means that the average time that
adopters wait for a match is nine months.


The chair of the adoption panel is experienced, knowledgeable and child
centred. He provides strong leadership to the adoption panel, which is
properly constituted and well attended. Panel minutes indicate a robust but
sensitive approach, resulting in well-informed recommendations. Feedback
from adopters who have attended the panel is positive. In addition, the chair
attends quarterly business meetings. The minutes evidence discussions about
key performance and practice issues. The adoption decision maker (ADM)
does not always attend these meetings, and this is a missed opportunity to
hear directly about the quality of practice. This is recognised by the ADM as
an area for improvement. The panel receives annual training, which recently
has included fostering to adopt and the learning from the one adoption
disruption.


An excellent feature of the JAS is the quality and extent of post-adoption
support. Three experienced and well-trained therapists are based in the JAS
and they all offer a wide range of therapeutic interventions. Adopters spoken
to by inspectors were all very positive about the quality and impact of postadoption support on their lives. With a strong focus on child development and
attachment, therapists help adopters to develop and sustain successful
relationships with their children. The JAS also makes good use of the adoption
support fund, with an impressive list of providers offering a range of
therapeutic services including psychotherapy, psychological assessment and


support, and occupational therapy. At the time of the inspection, 102 families
were receiving support. All work was allocated and no family was waiting for
support. There has been no overall evaluation of the impact of services
commissioned using the adoption support fund. Managers recognise that this
is a gap. That there has been only one adoption disruption in recent years
suggests that the work is effective.

Birth parents and relatives receive high-quality independent advice, support
and counselling, including the recent establishment of a support group, and
this is commissioned through a voluntary adoption agency. Letterbox
arrangements are well established, with support offered to adoptive and birth
families to maintain arrangements.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement to be good.


The service for children and young people who move on from being in care
has undergone considerable restructuring since April 2016. The new service
manager has been in post for under a year and, along with the new team
manager, is introducing improvements in many aspects of the service. The
areas identified by the service for improvement are similar to those identified
by inspectors. Some of these are still work in progress, and the impact for
young people is not yet clear in all areas of the service.


Despite the accommodation challenges that the local authority faces given the
high numbers of children placed in Shropshire by other authorities, most care
leavers live in suitable accommodation where they feel safe and well
supported. Just over a third of these young people live independently. Of the
small number who are not in suitable accommodation, seven are in custody,
one is living abroad and four are living with friends or in emergency
accommodation.


Personal advisers are appropriately skilled and have a good range of expertise
in different aspects of young peoples lives, including disabled young people,
and will signpost young people to specialist help services, including the readily
available drug and/or alcohol misuse service and the mental health team.
Personal advisers are adept at recognising health needs and supporting young
people to access appropriate therapeutic services or to seek further advice
from the children-in-care specialist nurse. Personal advisers and other staff
work closely with a good range of partner organisations, including the police,
youth services and health services, to reduce the risks to young people
around sexual exploitation.



The local authority is very successful at knowing the current status and
whereabouts of its care leavers. Almost all of the care leavers have had faceto-face contact with their personal adviser in the last six months, and the few
who had not were in regular phone or text message contact. Inspectors saw
evidence of young people being contacted very frequently and being offered
appropriate support to ensure that they are thriving and managing their daily
lives. For example, personal advisers will text a young person to remind them
that they have a medical appointment and offer to accompany them if
needed. Those who are in custody are visited more frequently to help them to
plan for when they leave custody. Young people recognise the commitment of
their personal advisers and are positive about the support that they receive.
One care leaver said that the leaving care team was like her second family,
that they had some laughs but that the team also respected the professional
boundaries, and that her relationship with her own personal adviser had
inspired her to want to train as a social worker.


An increasing number of care leavers are taking up the staying put option.
Just under half of those leaving care this year are expected to stay with their
foster carers or in their current supported lodgings. This enables care leavers
to obtain the support that they need until they are ready to live more
independently.


Support for young people to take up education, employment or training
opportunities is beginning to improve their participation. Part of the
improvement comes from the good collaboration between the virtual school
team, the personal adviser for information, advice and guidance (IAG) and
individual personal advisers. The virtual school team initially advises children,
and the IAG adviser supports the young people well when they leave school.
For example, the adviser will accompany a young person to an interview and
help them to apply for additional bursaries or other funds to buy any
equipment that they need. Younger care leavers are increasingly staying in
education, employment or training, but more work is needed to ensure that
this continues as they get older. Ten care leavers have progressed to higher
education in the last three years. One young person, now in his third year,
had not originally planned to apply, but had been encouraged by his foster
carers to do so and was supported effectively by his personal adviser to apply.


The support provided to care leavers when they consider that they are ready
to move into independent accommodation is not always effective enough to
ensure that these moves are successful. The local authority has recognised
the need to provide more advice and guidance to its care leavers, and recently
opened a drop-in facility in early September 2017 in Shrewsbury. As this is so
new, it is too early to see any impact or its effectiveness. Supported
accommodation providers offer training whenever a young person is ready or
expresses a wish to move on. In order to offer more support, a training flat to
help to ensure that young people are as ready as they can be for full
independence is being developed by the local authority, although it is not yet
in place. (Recommendation)



In order to improve the quality of pathway plans, a new-style pathway plan
was introduced within the last two months which is much more detailed and
potentially more useful than its predecessor. Care leavers and their personal
advisers can note key developments and targets for the six-monthly reviews.
However, the completed new plans are of very mixed quality. Too many basic
details are missing, such as the availability of a health passport or health
history and educational achievements. Targets are often quite generic. The
young people spoken to by inspectors did not value the plans or the process
of drawing them up. The authority is aware that there is more work to do to
improve this aspect of the care leavers service.


The local authority has been slow to roll out an apprenticeship offer for care
leavers, despite being a participant in the New Beginnings initiative. At the
time of the inspection, only one care leaver (now a graduate) was registered
for an apprenticeship. The leaving care team has identified 14 care leavers
who have the potential to be candidates for an apprenticeship. This is now
being progressed at corporate parenting board level to ensure that the offer
of apprenticeships is not subject to further drift. (Recommendation)


Care leavers do not have an active forum in which to celebrate their
achievements or share their experiences with one another. They are aware of
such opportunities for younger children in care, but do not consider these to
be appropriate for them. From an original cohort of 16 leaving care
ambassadors recruited to help to establish the forum, only two are left and
they are not clear about what role they are meant to play. This means that
the authority is missing their contribution in planning improvements to the
service that would make a difference to their lives. (Recommendation)


Although young people discuss their health status in health assessments and
can seek advice through the drop-in service with the specialist nurse and the
children looked after mental health nurse, they do not yet have access to their
recorded health histories. The local authority has prepared health passports
for care leavers to record their medical status and the services that they are
using, but at the time of the inspection they had not yet been distributed.


Despite the efforts by the local authority to circulate relevant information to
them, care leavers met by inspectors had little awareness of their
entitlements. The Shropshire local offer, or the Pledge, was approved by the
corporate parenting panel in September 2017. However, the information
provided to young people does not make clear the level of financial support
that they can expect, for example to set up home, contribute to transport
costs, use gym or sports facilities, or for related expenses if they are accepted
for a place at university. The authority is aware that it needs to improve the
arrangements for the care leavers forum and leaving care ambassadors. A
training flat and local authority-hosted apprenticeships are listed in the offer,
but the local authority has been slow to implement these developments.
(Recommendation)


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The strengthened senior leadership team, supported by corporate services, elected
members and partner agencies, with a particular catalyst since 2016, has
continued to systematically improve social work practice. This is reinforced by an
effective focus on key priorities and embedding higher-quality services for children
in Shropshire. Robust links and established, effective governance arrangements
ensure aligned safeguarding responses through strategic partnerships to improve
childrens outcomes. An embedded quality assurance culture, underpinned by
rigorous performance monitoring, audits and peer reviews with a strong focus on
safeguarding and early help in 2015 and 2016, has informed learning and practice
development across all areas of the service. Since 2016, new senior and service
managers have progressed improvements in the children looked after and care
leavers service to further consolidate social work practice.
A comprehensive and well-resourced multi-agency early help offer enables children
and families to receive the right level of support when they first need it. Services
to children in need of help and protection are good, and well-established strategic
and operational relationships with partners ensure very effective responses to child
sexual exploitation. More recent changes to improve the quality of practice in the
children looked after teams and care leavers service mean that some
improvements are not yet consistently established.
Senior managers are visible and know their services well. They use effective
quality assurance information, performance reports, single-agency and multiagency audit activity, peer reviews and feedback from staff and complaints to
scrutinise and improve practice and its impact for children and their families.
Where inspectors identified areas for improvement, senior managers had already
identified these and implemented robust action plans to improve services such as
permanence planning and consistency of supervision to progress childrens plans.
The corporate parenting panel is well established, and recent developments to
strengthen it are in place to improve the pace of change and to better the
engagement of and participation with children.
Effective workforce planning and development, alongside engagement with
regional partner initiatives and well-established academic partnerships, are
resulting in an increasingly stable workforce, with few social worker vacancies and
no manager vacancies at the time of this inspection.


Inspection findings

The senior leadership team, supported by strong corporate services, elected
members and partner agencies, is strongly committed to improving outcomes
for children in Shropshire. The councils chief executive has been in post since
November 2012 and the director of childrens services since April 2013. They
demonstrate a good understanding of their roles and communities, leading the
journey of continued improvements to services since their last inspection five
years ago. There are appropriate supportive and robust links between senior
leaders and both the independent chair of the Shropshire Safeguarding
Children Board (SSCB) and the councils portfolio holder. Governance
arrangements are well established and effective. They are aligned to other
strategic boards through Shropshires Pentagon of Partnerships, which
comprises the SSCB, the Health and Wellbeing Board, the Childrens Trust, the
Keeping Adults Safe in Shropshire Board and the Safer, stronger communities
Partnership, to ensure delivery of high-quality services for children.


The robust partnerships support shared accountability, mutual understanding
of priorities and challenge between partners. There are clear examples where
the director of childrens services and the chief executive have raised
safeguarding issues with partners or the safeguarding board to improve
practice. For example, the director of childrens services appropriately raised
the high use of police protection powers with West Mercia police partners,
which led to fewer children being accommodated unnecessarily. Fire risk
assessments were also raised at the private provider forum on behalf of
Shropshire fire and rescue service, so that they are properly in place with the
residential private providers, to ensure that children are appropriately
safeguarded.


The local authority has undertaken significant work to safeguard children at
risk of child sexual exploitation, built on well-established strategic and
operational relationships with partners such as West Mercia police. This has
enabled rigorous responses to safeguard children and young people who go
missing or who are at risk of sexual exploitation. A recently formed task and
finish group is scoping work to align gangs, missing children and county line
vulnerabilities linked to the child sexual abuse strategic group.


Successful recruitment and appointment to all manager posts has
strengthened the senior management team in the last 18 months. This has led
to further improvements to services, with a strengthened focus now on the
children looked after teams and care leavers service. Senior managers are
highly visible and accessible. This was confirmed by staff in conversation with
inspectors. There is a well-established performance management culture with
good use made of accurate, regular quality assurance information and
performance reports. However, there is still work to do to include care leavers
data in overarching performance reports. Regular single-agency and multiagency audit activity, peer reviews and feedback from staff are used by


managers to understand their services, teams and staff well and to scrutinise
and improve practice and its impact for children and their families.

Inspectors saw clear evidence that managers know the strengths and areas
for development in their service very well. Senior managers had already
identified and taken action on many of the findings by inspectors to raise
standards, inform training and improve practice by putting appropriate action
plans in place. For example, work to understand and respond to the
prevalence and impact of neglect and domestic abuse on children and their
families, to improve outcomes, has started with updated strategies and
training of all staff and partners. The implementation of a range of panels,
including legal planning and placement panels to strengthen care planning
and management oversight, is also a positive development. There have been
further improvements to decision-making in permanence planning, supported
by the very recent development of a permanency tracker and a permanency
panel, although it is too early to see evidence of impact for children.


Along with partners, the local authority has commissioned and implemented a
comprehensive and well-resourced early help offer so that children and
families receive the right level of support when they first need it. Services to
children in need of help and protection are good. Inspectors found an
established, effective initial response to children and families in need of
service through the front door arrangements. Senior managers recognise that
more work is required to ensure that practice is consistently effective across
all teams.


While there is not an updated joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA),
extensive performance information, public health data and consultation with
stakeholders inform effective commissioning of high-quality services. This
commissioning includes robust safeguarding standards within contracts,
meaningful involvement of children and young people to influence
commissioning activity and ongoing contract management to ensure that
services are effective. Inspectors saw examples of well-informed joint
commissioning, including the child and adolescent mental health service retender, the commissioning of early help services and the recent short-breaks
tender. Ongoing work on Shropshires sufficiency strategy has resulted in a
timely review of placement block contracts, including engagement in regional
fostering frameworks and an appropriate review of in-house fostering to
increase the range of placements available.


Changes to elected members in May 2017 have resulted in a new childrens
services portfolio holder and further developments to Shropshires corporate
parenting panel. The panel has benefited from increased capacity, with
additional meetings and wider membership, including representatives from
headteachers, foster carers, young people and health. Despite appropriate
developments having been raised by the panel, the pace of change in
implementing these has been slower than planned. The councils scrutiny
panel has agreed a review of the effectiveness of the corporate parenting


strategy, including the role of corporate parents, and the corporate parenting
panel, in the forward plan for 201718 to ensure its impact for children.

Shropshire, as a host authority, has a good local offer for the large number of
children looked after placed by other local authorities. The local authority has
strong links with the large group of private providers through an effective and
well-attended, regular provider forum, chaired by the director of childrens
services. Representatives from key partner agencies also attend these
provider meetings to ensure safeguarding oversight of all children placed in
Shropshire.


Through robust monitoring of performance information and regular audits,
senior managers have identified the developments required in the consistency
of supervision and management oversight. Inspectors found that supervision
and management oversight are embedded across teams, with managers and
staff reporting routine discussions to progress cases through supervision
sessions and ad hoc discussions. Reflective, analytical supervision and group
supervision are in place for some social workers. However, there is more work
to do to ensure consistency and to improve recording to allow effective
monitoring of plans to safeguard children across all services.


The local authoritys commissioned advocacy and independent visitors service
and regular learning updates from complaints ensure that information is
available for managers to remain strongly focused on improving services using
feedback from children and their families. Inspectors saw improvements,
identified in feedback, which were positively influencing practice for children.
For example, focused training for staff had taken place to increase the
timeliness of good-quality assessments for children in need of help and
protection, leading to appropriate focused interventions. There is still work to
do to develop participation and engagement of children and families,
especially in child protection processes, to underpin further service
development. Work with the very recently formed service user group across
all areas of the service is planned to address developments. It is too early to
see the impact of this for children.


The local authority engages very well with regional partners. Initiatives such
as the West Midlands recruitment and retention groups to develop the
childrens services workforce are effective. Overseen by the principal social
worker, work to update the comprehensive workforce strategy is promoting
social work professional development across all levels of experience. This is
enhanced by well-established academic partnerships with the West Midlands
and North West Midlands teaching partnerships to ensure strong interest and
applications from newly qualified social workers. Corporate support and
financial backing from the chief executive are leading to an increasingly stable
and quality workforce that can meet the needs of children in Shropshire.


At the time of the inspection, there were eight social work vacancies and
appropriate use of a stable group of 17 agency workers. The numbers of


agency workers mean that the local authority is able to provide additional
support to the assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE) cohort,
alongside cover of maternity leave, sickness and vacancies. This is resulting in
staff being able to build good, meaningful relationships with children and their
families, with managers monitoring caseloads to ensure that they are
manageable.


Inspectors found that senior managers demonstrate a strong commitment to
promoting and maintaining a learning organisation culture. All staff and
partners spoken to fed back positively on the range of learning and
development opportunities linked to service developments, including
recording, risk analysis, assessment and planning improvements.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
The performance of the Shropshire Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB), in terms
of ensuring that all its partners are working to keep children safe, is good.
Agencies that make up the board understand their safeguarding responsibilities
across Shropshire and work well together to improve the quality of multi-agency
working and practice.
The board demonstrates activity and pace in its work through a well-developed
business plan whose key priorities of child sexual exploitation, domestic abuse and
neglect form a golden thread of activity across the work of the boards sub-groups.
There is an established programme of multi-agency and section 11 audits. In
addition, the board requires assurance reports from individual agencies to help it
to understand the quality of practice in services provided to children.
Consequently, the board has been able to ensure progress and impact, including
strengthening of partner agencies responses to domestic violence. The board is
also able to demonstrate that it challenges practice and that it has made a
difference, for instance ensuring that key health staff remain involved in social
cares front door response.
The board is active in promoting issues concerning neglect and it recently
approved a revised neglect strategy for Shropshire. The board understands the
nature and extent of local issues in relation to children going missing and children
at risk of sexual exploitation. It has ensured that a complete review of practice
guidance was carried out and that toolkits to help practitioners work in this area
are available. The board is active in raising awareness among both workers and
children through a well-developed relationships and sex education programme that
is used in almost all schools.
The child death overview panel is effective and ensures a greater understanding of
the reasons for child deaths in Shropshire. Panel findings have led to helpful work
on safer sleeping for infants initiatives in the county.
Where there are concerns about practice in particular cases, the board is making
sure that these are thoroughly examined and that lessons learned are
disseminated effectively through its learning and development framework. The
board also provides a wide variety of training courses which are well evaluated,
enabling the board to see the impact of training on practice.
The board has a multi-agency dataset and receives regular performance
information on a quarterly basis. However, it lacks commentary on and analysis of


this data, which makes the dataset less useful as a tool for the board to determine
weaknesses and strengths in performance.

Recommendations

To better enable an understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of
performance and practice, ensure that there is appropriate analysis and
commentary on the dataset made available to board members.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

There are appropriate governance arrangements which ensure accountability
and scrutiny by the Shropshire Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) of
safeguarding practice in the county. Responsibility for the boards activity and
performance in safeguarding is shared by partners with sub-groups of the
board chaired by the police, health and legal services. While the SSCB chair is
not a member of the Childrens Trust or the Health and Wellbeing Board, the
objectives of the SSCB are communicated through membership of the
overarching Shropshire Pentagon of Partnerships, ensuring that the priorities
and objectives of the five major partnerships in Shropshire are aligned.


The SSCB has a clear business plan focused on significant community issues,
particularly neglect, domestic abuse and child sexual exploitation. The plan
identifies key areas for development and improvement priorities which are
then repeated as key themes in sub-group activity and development. Progress
is measured through an action plan that demonstrates significant activity and
pace in achieving its objectives.


There is an established programme of monitoring the effectiveness of multiagency frontline practice with multi-agency audit activity in the past two
years, focusing on child sexual exploitation practice, domestic violence,
effectiveness of core-group activity, child mental health well-being and
neglect. All have robust action plans followed up by the quality assurance and
performance sub-group, with progress reported to the board. Impact is
measurable with, for instance, the introduction of an updated graded care
profile as an outcome of the neglect audit. As a result of audits on domestic
abuse response and practice, the board has strengthened the response by
including a review of the domestic violence strategy and improving
information sharing by mental health partners. The board has also
successfully lobbied for funding for a perpetrator programme.


The board has a multi-agency dataset and receives regular performance
information on a quarterly basis. Each quarter also has a focus on a particular
area of priority for the board, such as neglect. While the data provided gives a
picture of activity over time, with some comparisons made with statistical
neighbours, it lacks commentary and analysis. This makes the dataset less


useful as a tool for the board to determine weaknesses and strengths in
performance. (Recommendation)

The board undertakes a comprehensive programme of section 11 audits
designed to ensure that individual agencies audit their own safeguarding
processes and can assure the board that these are in place and are effective.
The board has undertaken an analysis of compliance and, as a result, has very
recently redesigned the reporting format to ensure more accurate responses.
The board also has an agency assurance process. This process provides the
board with often very detailed reports from agencies about safeguarding
practice, impact of policy and procedural changes in the organisation as well
as, where applicable, findings from its own inspectorates. These reports help
the board to be aware of issues affecting single agencies and to gain an
understanding of both good and poor examples of work which the board can
then challenge.


The board has a learning and development framework which has been
reviewed recently. This ensures that learning from serious case and
management reviews is being disseminated across agencies. Learning events
are held on local cases and learning from national serious case reviews (SCRs)
is disseminated through one-page learning and improvement briefings, and
half-day briefings. This learning is also published on the SSCB website and
circulated among agencies. The SCR sub-group has ensured that there is
appropriate analysis of the issues arising, including action plans and progress
on those plans. The SSCB has ensured that there is a level of awareness of
the board and its role in SCRs by local authority staff. Staff met by inspectors
demonstrated strong awareness of practice messages from these cases.


The board has a challenge log which evidences a range of concerns, actions
taken and progress made through responses to challenge. As a result, the
board can demonstrate that it has made a difference. These achievements
include a successful intervention with West Mercia police to suspend a
proposal to integrate specialist police services (child protection, child sexual
exploitation) for vulnerable groups with more mainstream policing processes
and staff, and ensuring that public health did not remove two health visitors
from the Compass front door service.


The child death overview panel, shared with Telford and Wrekin, is effective.
The panel publishes an annual report on its work, including an analysis of
child deaths in the region. There is a focus on the identification of modifiable
factors, which, for Shropshire, are neo-natal behaviours in pregnant women,
including smoking, obesity and parental mental health issues. This had led to
a continuation of initiatives such as sleeping in infants seminars and the
introduction of the safer sleep assessment to the personal child health record
issued to all parents of newborn babies.


The board has ensured that it has a thorough understanding of the
effectiveness of early help. It reviewed and reissued the threshold document


for services in March 2017. Through its learning and development sub-group,
the board has also ensured that training was delivered to support multiagency practitioners with the implementation of the early help whole-family
approach, practice and process, including early help family assessments. This
was particularly effective, with 467 people attending between April 2016 and
June 2017. A recent review of early help survey indicated that 97% of staff
knew how to access early help.

The board publishes an annual report which demonstrates effectively the
progress in implementing the business plan and in the work of the board subgroups. The report evidences challenge to the quality of services and
performance, as well as enabling an understanding of the effectiveness of
current services and progress being made. The report is clear about the
importance of young peoples voices and includes a section on engagement
with young people through a student SSCB, recruited from schools and
colleges.


An established training and development framework offers a wide range of
levels and complexity of subjects. Courses are designed to meet the needs of
a wide variety of staff, from those who require basic general knowledge to
those who require specialist input. Courses include awareness of and
responses to child sexual exploitation, domestic violence, drugs and alcohol
misuse, issues of neglect, including the introduction of an updated graded
care profile. An effective evaluation process using pre- and post-course
questionnaires and a three-month follow-up regarding impact resulted in an
impressive average response across all courses of 67%. Further sampling by
phone calls from the training coordinator to trained staff allows for a more indepth discussion about impact and improved outcomes. This enables the
board to publish an effective and well-informed annual report on evaluation
outcomes.


The board actively promotes issues concerning neglect. It commissioned a
multi-agency audit in 2016 on neglect and recently approved a revised neglect
strategy launched at the boards bi-annual conference in November 2016. This
included proposals to implement an updated graded care profile in Shropshire.
This has now been actioned, with 137 practitioners attending training on the
profile since November 2016.


The board understands the nature and extent of local issues in relation to
children going missing and children at risk of sexual exploitation. The child
sexual exploitation pathway, toolkit and practitioner guidance have all been
revised in the last 18 months. A child sexual exploitation scorecard has been
introduced to enable the board to better measure performance. A third sector
agency was commissioned in 2016 to raise awareness in the commercial
sector of child sexual exploitation, and training has been rolled out to
licensees and taxi drivers. The Respect Yourself programme is delivered to


reached over 300 staff, raising awareness of the use of a recognised practice
toolkit.

The board is particularly aware of the challenges of having 92 registered
private childrens homes within the local authority area. It has been active in
trying to ensure that these homes comply with local safeguarding procedures
and that when young people from these homes go missing they receive
appropriate return home interviews. Recently, the board has been successful
in securing funding with the West Mercia police and crime commissioner, who
has responsibility for policing matters in Shropshire, to ensure that this takes
place in future. The Shropshire personal, social, health and economic (PSHE)
education programme is particularly well developed, and it is nationally
recognised and promoted by the board. It is being delivered to 87% of all
schools in the county and focuses on keeping children safe through a better
understanding of relationships and sex education. Extensive work has been
undertaken on the impact of this work, and significant further work is planned
for schools, including Digital romance and how young people use social
media to make and break relationships online, all to be delivered in November


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and one Ofsted Inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Warren HMI
Deputy lead inspector: Tara Geere HMI
Team inspectors: Mandy Nightingale HMI, Alison Smale HMI, Peter McEntee HMI,
Nick Gadfield HMI, Andy Smith (Ofsted Inspector)
Senior data analyst: Matthew King
Quality assurance manager: Christopher Sands SHMI


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


