London Borough of Southwark
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 6 March 2017  30 March 2017
Report published: 13 June 2017

Childrens services in Southwark are good

Good


Requires improvement


Outstanding


Requires improvement


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Southwark are good overall. Leaders and managers understand
the strengths and areas for development of their service well. Southwark attracts
experienced, high-quality social workers who are keen to work in small units that
employ systemic methods, under the social work matters initiative. This model,
launched in 2014, is well established. The model is well resourced and features
clinical and group supervision alongside manageable caseloads. This promotes
influential and effective direct work with children and families. The model is enabling
a flourishing social work culture in the local authority, equipping social workers to
address complex local concerns in this highly diverse community, including serious
youth violence, gangs and female genital mutilation.
The local authority continually strives to improve, developing innovative services
which are informed by childrens participation and involvement. This shapes the
design of adaptable and flexible services and improves outcomes for children. Highquality management oversight is not yet consistently good across all parts of the
service. The local authority has recognised this shortfall and is working quickly to
ensure that all social workers receive good-quality management oversight, support
and challenge.
The majority of children and families in Southwark are helped through carefully
designed services. The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH), formed of 20
agencies, is effective in responding to cases when children are at risk of harm,
although managers decisions on referrals are not consistently completed within the
required 24-hour period. There are also missed opportunities to involve all relevant
partners in child protection strategy discussions.
Younger children who have emerging and additional needs are helped through an
extensive range of services clustered around childrens centres. Targeted early help
for some younger children who have more substantial difficulties is helpfully focused
on their educational needs, but would be further strengthened by a more holistic
response to a wider range of difficulties affecting their lives at home. However, there
are strong early help services for older children, helping families and children to
improve their lives and preventing the need for subsequent statutory social work
involvement.
Assessments of childrens and families circumstances identify the major difficulties
facing children and their families. This results in focused child in need or child
protection plans for most children, which contribute to reducing risk. Southwark and
its partners have particular strengths in identifying and protecting young women at
risk of female genital mutilation, honour-based violence, bullying or sexual
exploitation through gang associations. Women who have experienced earlier
multiple removals of their children through care proceedings are helped to change
radically the subsequent direction of their lives through a highly successful, awardwinning project called Pause.


The local authority engages constructively with families with children for whom there
are serious safeguarding concerns in the pre-care proceedings stages of intervention
and prevents the majority from subsequently entering care. Social workers produce
timely and well-constructed evidence when care proceedings are necessary.
The local authority has developed strong, creative and adaptable multi-agency
partnership responses to address child sexual exploitation and other risks to
adolescents, such as knife crime. Children who go missing from home or care are
closely tracked, although return home interviews are not regularly completed and,
when they are, the information obtained to help to prevent further missing episodes
is not always of good quality.
Senior managers are aware that too many children in care, especially older children,
have too many placement breakdowns that are, in many cases, the result of poorly
planned and matched placements. Early adoption permanence planning is strong,
but there are delays in achieving permanence for too many children in long-term
fostering arrangements.
The quality of management oversight for children in care is not sufficiently
challenging to improve outcomes for all children. This is further inhibited by many
children in care having too many changes of social worker, preventing them from
establishing strong relationships built on professional trust.
Many care leavers live in safe, suitable housing and achieve good outcomes in their
education, employment and training. Some young people are not fully informed
about the support and entitlements that would help them, even if they are doing well
at college or university.
The local authority has a well-established culture of identifying children at the
earliest stage of their difficulties, who might go on to be adopted, and carefully
tracks and promotes adoption or other forms of legal permanence as soon as
possible. Adopters highly appreciate the assessment, training and support that they
receive from knowledgeable and dedicated social workers.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be good in
its most recent Ofsted inspection. This is a short-breaks service, which is
registered as a five-bedded childrens home.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The strategic director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since October
 The DCS is also responsible for adults social care services.
 The chief executive has been in post since July 2012.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since May 2013.
 The local authority uses the systemic and signs of safety models of social work.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 62,000 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Southwark. This is 20.3% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 28.2% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 19% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 29% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 65% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Black African and Black Caribbean.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in primary schools is 46% (the national average is 20%)
 in secondary schools is 36% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 28 February 2017, 2,694 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 28 February 2017, 327 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 284
(45 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 28 February 2017, 35 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 21 at 31 March 2015.
 In the two years before inspection, two serious incident notifications were
submitted to Ofsted, and one serious case review (SCR) was completed.
 There was one SCR ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 28 February 2017, 510 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 81 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 475 (75 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
Of this number:
authority area
 none lives in residential special schools3
 five live with parents, of whom 40% live out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 18 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that prompt decisions are made to safeguard children affected by
long-term, cumulative neglect, so that they are not left in adverse home
circumstances for long periods.


Work with partner agencies to ensure that referrals contain sufficient
information and that parental consent has been obtained if necessary, so that
management decisions on the required action are timely and families receive
help quickly.


Ensure that strategy discussions and strategy meetings involve all relevant
agencies so that multi-agency information informs assessment of risks.


Ensure that return home interviews with children missing from home and care
are completed consistently and effectively so that the intelligence gained
reduces the recurrence of further missing episodes.


Strengthen management oversight of social workers in the children looked
after and care leavers services.


Ensure that the sufficiency strategy, supported by effective commissioning,
provides a better supply of high-quality placements for children looked after,
particularly for adolescents who display challenging behaviours.


Ensure that childrens care plans are effectively and regularly reviewed to
confirm whether their needs are being met through their placements, and
establish alternative plans where necessary.


Ensure that children looked after who live outside of the local authority area
are not disadvantaged through slower access to essential services, particularly
child and adolescent mental health services, education support and regular
health assessments.


Ensure that children looked after are supported to build strong and enduring
attachments to their carers through more timely permanence decisions for
long-term foster family arrangements. Ensure timely life story work, which is
kept up to date.


Ensure that all social workers and personal advisers working with young
people leaving care have a clear knowledge of their current circumstances.
This aim should be supported through consistently effective pathway
planning, to ensure that young people understand and receive all their
entitlements and that their identified needs are met.



Ensure that children are aware of how to complain about services provided to
them and that more advocacy support is provided for children on child
protection plans and for those who are looked after. Ensure good access to
independent visitors for children looked after.


Summary for children and young people
 Most services for children and families in Southwark are good, and adoption
services are outstanding. Managers and local politicians are very determined to
continue to improve those services that are not yet good, and they have effective
plans to do this.
 Most children and families receive good early help, and, when they need
protecting, responses are quick. However, some children who have been
neglected by their families have had to wait too long to receive help.
 Social workers each work hard with a small number of families to make sure that
children and families get the right help at the right time. Most social workers have
time to spend with children to get to know them well.
 Southwark is very good at helping young people who face particular difficulties,
such as the risk of female genital mutilation, honour-based violence and
involvement with gangs and knife crime. Southwark also does some important
work with women who have had their children removed from them to avoid the
same thing happening again.
 Managers listen to the views of children carefully. For example, young people
have helped the local authority to develop better accommodation for care leavers.
 Many young people leaving care are doing well in work, training or further
education, but some young people do not know their rights and entitlements as
care leavers.
 Some young people who are looked after by Southwark are moved around too
much from one placement to another. Managers need to make sure that the right
placements are chosen first time around, so that there is no need for them to
move again.
 Social workers in Southwark work hard to ensure that there is no delay for
children who may be able to be adopted. Children from a wide variety of
backgrounds and of different ages are adopted. When they have been adopted,
their parents receive good support from the local authority when they need it.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Safeguarding concerns are recognised quickly as they are referred promptly for
assessment and action. A large range of partners are co-located in the MASH,
which promotes good communication, information sharing and joint working. The
majority of contacts are rapidly screened, although not all management decisions
are timely. This is because the quality of information provided by referring
agencies is not consistently helpful, and parental consent is not always sought in
advance, when required. This means that for some children there is some delay in
being seen and assessed.
Children and families have access to a good range of targeted early help services,
some of which are excellent. Improvements are being made to ensure that all
children receive early help in a timely manner, with evidence that an
implementation programme is beginning to yield results to achieve this.
Children at risk of significant harm are promptly identified and protected.
Thresholds are well understood by staff across childrens social care. Child
protection strategy meetings and enquiries are timely and take decisive actions to
protect children. In most cases, only the police and childrens social care are
involved in strategy meetings. As a consequence, not all available information is
being considered at the earliest opportunity.
The majority of assessments feature a clear focus on children and are informed by
their experiences. They inform plans characterised by timeliness and clear actions.
Most children benefit from regular and effective reviews of their plans, resulting in
purposeful progress that reduces risks to them. Direct work with children is well
established in Southwark, resulting in high-quality engagement, which enables
children to describe their experiences and concerns powerfully. A high proportion
of assessments result in no further social care involvement. However, many are
stepped down appropriately to a broad range of early help services. This is not
consistent across the whole service. In a small minority, long-term cumulative
neglect is not always addressed quickly enough.
Arrangements for tracking missing children are effective. Improved responses to
children who go missing from home are acknowledged by the local authority as an
area requiring further attention.
Work with children at risk of child sexual exploitation is effective, reducing levels of
risk for many children. Engagement with young women and girls at risk of
exposure to female genital mutilation is very strong, with high numbers of
notifications and effective work, including the use of court orders, which reduces
risks.


Inspection findings

All new contacts concerning children are promptly screened through the
MASH. Safeguarding concerns are promptly recognised and passed on quickly
for assessment and action. Twenty partners are co-located in the MASH,
which has improved communication and joint working. Recent changes have
resulted in a consistent core MASH team membership, ensuring good
information sharing and effective communication about children and their
families. Thresholds are well understood and applied within the MASH and
across childrens social care. Parental consent, if appropriate, is routinely
considered within the MASH and clearly recorded. Screening and triaging of
domestic abuse referrals by the police, who are co-located in the MASH, and
childrens social care are rigorous.


In cases considered within the MASH where safeguarding concerns are not
readily apparent, many decisions are not completed within the 24-hour target.
Timeliness on this aspect has deteriorated in recent months. Regular
performance information and a sophisticated live dashboard in the MASH are
not being utilised effectively by managers and staff to improve performance
and timeliness. Many delays are caused by referrals lacking sufficient
information and parental consent. These are most likely for children identified
as requiring a child in need assessment. This means that some children who
require an assessment of need are not seen soon enough.


Out-of-hours arrangements are effective. Interventions are timely and
proportionate, and followed up by prompt liaison with daytime staff.
Communication and handover are well managed, resulting in continuity for
children and families.


Work with children at risk of child sexual exploitation is effective, resulting in
risks reducing for many children exposed to this danger. Adaptive and creative
multi-agency partnerships provide responsive and purposeful approaches to
emerging sexual exploitation and other adolescent risks, including knife crime,
gangs and honour-based violence.


Effective arrangements ensure a robust strategic and operational approach to
the identification of child sexual exploitation, prevention, support and
disruption of perpetrators. Intelligence is shared well through a strategic
multi-agency child sexual exploitation meeting (MASE), operational meetings
and a problem profile group. An adolescent at risk meeting is being piloted,
which considers multiple risks confronting young people. The child sexual
exploitation assessment tool is used well for initial risk assessments, but is
used too infrequently to review continuing risks. Constructive joint working
has led to informed service developments, such as the youth offending
services gangs team and a child sexual exploitation police team. These
initiatives have improved shared intelligence and understanding of risks
through an operational child sexual exploitation group. Social workers are kept


up to date on new risks and vulnerabilities about individual children, as well as
on specific locations of concern, which assists their preventative work.

Work addressing female genital mutilation is particularly strong, with high
numbers of notifications and subsequent effective work to reduce risks,
including frequent use of court orders. Sensitive community engagement with
at-risk communities is evident. Social workers address cultural sensitivities
carefully, while remaining risk focused. Children are at the centre of decisionmaking and child protection plans. Similarly, honour-based violence work is
also risk focused and culturally sensitive, with purposeful, child-focused social
work. Examples of high-quality direct work with young people facing risks
from gangs were seen by inspectors, enabling the young people to powerfully
describe their experiences and producing effective interventions to lower risks.


Some children do not receive local authority early help in a timely way.
Improvements are being made, and an implementation programme is
beginning to yield demonstrable improvements. A reorganisation of childrens
centres is showing early signs of more efficient multi-agency practice and
coordination of services. Better-informed targeting of vulnerable groups is
providing the right children and families with help. Early help services have
developed a more cohesive alignment with childrens social care, for example
revising their processes and templates to incorporate the same approach to
assessments. Services are more needs led and consistent across the borough,
utilising both one-to-one and group work to support families. Improved
outcomes for children and families are demonstrated through constructive
feedback and measures that clearly show how problems and difficulties have
substantially reduced.


The Pause initiative is an innovative model, demonstrating a positive impact
through preventing subsequent care proceedings for women who have
experienced repeated removals of their children. The relationship, strength
and community-based approach to working with these women are highly
valued, resulting in there being no further care proceedings for the women in
the 18 months since its inception. No further pregnancies occurred in the last
year, alongside improvements in the womens development of positive
identities, self-esteem, relationships and enhanced well-being. Contact with
their children in care improved, in terms of both reliability and quality.


Support provided in four early help locality teams is predominantly school
orientated, particularly focused on improving childrens school attendance.
Some interventions are too parent focused, and children are not always seen
sufficiently soon. Delays are apparent in engaging some referred families.
Management oversight is not ensuring that childrens outcomes are improved.
The common assessment framework is underdeveloped and is used by most
partner agencies as a referral form rather than as an assessment of childrens
needs. This leads to some children who have lower levels of additional needs
experiencing delays in receiving early help.



Children at risk of significant harm are promptly identified and protected.
Thresholds are clearly understood and applied by childrens social care staff.
Child protection strategy meetings and enquiries are timely and result in
decisive action to protect children. In most cases, only the police and
childrens social care are involved in strategy meetings, which results in not all
information being considered at the earliest opportunity. Given the number of
partners present in the MASH, this is a missed opportunity.


Most assessments are completed to a high standard, underpinned by a
systemic model of social work that is well established. Assessments are timely
and clear, and have a clear focus on children, informed by their experiences.
A high proportion result in no further action, but step down to early help
services is measured, and appropriate referrals are made to a wide range of
agencies. Childrens cultural backgrounds and identities are at the forefront of
some assessments and interventions, but the impact of ethnicity, inequality
and environment on some children is not fully understood. There are limited
pockets of the service where assessments are not of a consistently high
standard.


Most plans are timely and ambitious and have clear, accountable actions.
However, this is not consistently the case across the service. The local
authority is aware that some practice is not of the standard required, and
assertive action has been taken by managers to address performance issues.
Social workers effectively engage with family members, addressing presenting
and wider needs, and endeavour to involve fathers and male partners,
resulting in improved interventions. Child-focused social work results in
positive outcomes for the majority of children and families. Long-term,
cumulative neglect of some children is not always addressed decisively or
soon enough.


Plans clearly specify what parents, children and young people need to do to
achieve improvements, but some plans could more clearly articulate the
outcomes sought by the provision of services. All social workers value weekly
systemic group supervision, supported by advanced and clinical practitioners,
enabling regular opportunities to share perspectives, analyse, reflect and
hypothesise. Reflective and evaluative management supervision in most
teams, supported by regular group supervision, results in better decisionmaking and outcomes for children.


Most children benefit from regular and effective reviews of their plans,
resulting in purposeful progress and reduced risks. Child protection chairs are
confident and escalate issues as necessary, quickly resolving concerns within
the childrens service and with other agencies. Child in need and core group
meetings are also held regularly. However, too few children benefit from the
support of an advocate.



Children who have disabilities are provided with a good service, co-located
with health services for children who have additional needs. Thresholds are
applied effectively and, where necessary, safeguarding concerns are escalated
appropriately, including subsequent use of the Public Law Outline (PLO). Child
protection concerns are swiftly recognised, and involved agencies are
appropriately challenged. The completion of assessments and plan objectives
for some children is not sufficiently timely. In some cases seen by inspectors,
transitions to adult services provision were characterised by drift in timescales
and a lack of management oversight.


A range of well-designed services is available to both parents and children.
Social workers and their managers are highly aware of the combined dangers
for children of domestic abuse, parental mental ill health and substance
misuse. Effective services work collectively with families, and individually with
parents and children, reducing the risk of harm to children who live in families
in which these conditions prevail. The local authority has a comprehensive
understanding of the profile of domestic violence, substance misuse and
parental ill health. Child in need and child protection plans carefully evaluate
the impact of service provision for children and families affected by this trio of
difficulties. Multi-agency risk assessment conferences and multi-agency public
protection arrangements are both effective.


An edge of care service, the specialist family focus team, has improved the
outcomes for 130 families with children aged over 11 years. Families benefit
from intensive, creative, multi-disciplinary, evidence- and research-based
practice grounded in a systemic practice model. The keeping families
together team provides a dynamic, strength- and relationship-based team
around the child approach, offering intensive family support and achieving
positive outcomes for most families.


Services for children who go missing from home are acknowledged by the
local authority as an area requiring improved practice. Arrangements for
tracking missing children are rigorous, through regular monitoring and liaison,
with appropriate actions pursued by involved agencies. However, return home
interviews are not being consistently completed, and their content does not
helpfully inform subsequent work to reduce the risk of further missing
episodes.


The local authority holds clear and accurate information on children who are
missing education and those who are electively home educated. Most children
missing education are successfully tracked and identified. Staff undertake
checks with all relevant agencies to establish their whereabouts, including
housing, local authority council tax records, UK Visas and Immigration and
childrens social care. Staff regularly see children, ensuring that they have a
good overview of their welfare.



Clear and well-established joint pathways between housing and social care are
in place, ensuring that young people are well supported when they present as
homeless. Joint assessments address presenting and underlying issues. Once
a young persons immediate needs are considered, interventions, including
family therapy or mediation, follow. Unaccompanied asylum seekers also
benefit from a well-defined service pathway when they present for support in
Southwark.


Private fostering arrangements are highly effective. Successful awareness
raising has resulted in a significant increase in notifications. Private fostering
assessments are timely and completed to a high standard. The use of a
specific template ensures that relevant information is gathered. This includes
a detailed account of the childs history and direct work ensuring that
childrens views are taken into account. Parallel with this work, an assessment
of the carer is undertaken, including relevant checks and consents. Relevant
and purposeful actions are pursued to support children in their placements.


The designated officer function has recently been enhanced and is effective.
Well-attended strategy meetings provide clear, specific actions. Partnership
arrangements are effective, and there are clear reporting arrangements.
However, the designated officer does not measure the timeliness of
investigations, which is a shortcoming.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires
improvement

Summary
The quality of work is too variable for children looked after, and the majority of
practice requires improvement. While outcomes for most children looked after are
good, they are less positive for a significant minority of children. A small number of
children have to wait too long to become looked after. Many experience delays in
the starting or updating of their life story work, and some children who are in longterm foster placements have to wait too long to achieve permanence.
Overall, there is poor oversight of cases for children looked after by managers and
independent reviewing officers (IROs). Delays in delivering childrens care plans
and, in a small number of cases, assurance regarding the safeguarding of children,
are not being addressed effectively.
Too many children have experienced numerous moves and placement
breakdowns. There is a lack of sufficient placements for adolescents who have
challenging behaviours, and the local authority has been too slow to address this.
The local authority has successfully improved timeliness for cases in the PLO, and
those issued before the courts. Most children and families subject to the PLO are
now effectively supported to reduce risks, allowing children to remain with their
families.
The virtual school effectively supports and challenges the quality of provision of
childrens education for those who are looked after. Childrens attainment is above
that of comparators, but the attainment gap between children looked after and
their peers remains wide.
Younger children benefit from early consideration of permanence, which enables
them to live in permanent homes within reasonable timescales.
Experienced, well-trained social workers effectively support and prepare children
for adoption. Prospective adopters are rigorously assessed and receive high-quality
training and post-adoption support. As a result, children thrive in their adoptive
homes.
The support that care leavers receive is too inconsistent, and managers are not
effectively addressing this. While many young people receive the support that they
need to make progress in some aspects of their lives, the support and progress
that they make is not consistent across all areas. Staff do not know the current
needs and circumstances of a significant minority of young people and, as a result,
are not in a position to offer the support that these young people need.


Inspection findings

Children become looked after when this is the most appropriate way to meet
their needs. A relatively high number of children have become looked after
urgently after critical incidents, despite several of them being in the PLO
process or otherwise known to the local authority. In these cases, the known
risks had escalated to a degree that the children were experiencing situations
in which there was high and immediate risk of harm. In a small number of
these cases, earlier action may have prevented further adverse impacts for
children.


For children who return to their families as part of a planned move, risks are
assessed and, for most children, effective transition plans are in place. These
provide a clear framework to support children and their families both prior to
and following return home. For some young people who choose to return
home immediately, there are delays in putting effective support plans in place.


Following a review of the use of the PLO, a strengthened approach to
achieving permanence for children is now in place. A variety of measures,
including an effective permanency taskforce meeting, are being used to
maintain a strong overview of children subject to the PLO and children with a
plan for adoption. As a result, the duration of care proceedings is continuing
to reduce for children.


Legal planning meetings, support, interventions and relevant assessments are
all used effectively to reach clear decisions for families during the PLO. In the
majority of cases, actions are followed through in a timely way, and risks are
reduced, thereby avoiding the need to progress to care proceedings.


The majority of assessments and court statements contain appropriate
explorations of histories and risks, and analyse issues well to reach relevant
conclusions. They include the views of parents, including fathers, and most
provide a good overview of childrens needs. However, childrens personalities
and lived experiences are not always clearly described, particularly those of
younger children.


Too many children looked after have experienced multiple changes of social
workers. Despite almost all children looked after receiving regular visits from
social workers, these are not always purposeful, and many children have not
been able to establish a strong rapport with their social worker. When children
are able to build relationships with their social worker, the quality of direct
work is often very child centred, and there is evidence of childrens wishes
influencing their plans.


Advocacy is not being used well for children looked after. Only 11 children
were supported by an advocate at their review meetings in 201516. The local
authority does not know how many children are currently being supported by


the independent visitors scheme, or how many children are waiting. Despite
concerted efforts by the complaints team to advertise the process, children
told inspectors that they do not know how to make a complaint.

There is a variable response to issues of bullying affecting children. For
example, one child who was experiencing bullying was provided with support
immediately. For another child, concerns of bullying were not adequately
addressed by the professional network or included within the childs care plan.


In most cases seen, the risk of child sexual exploitation to children looked
after has reduced as a result of intervention and support. This has included
appropriate use of secure accommodation, keep safe work and support from
sexual health specialists. For children who go missing from care, the quality
and timeliness of return home interviews and the quality of planning through
regular strategy meetings are not consistently strong or reducing risks.
Children who are misusing drugs or alcohol, or who are offending within the
community, are offered an appropriate multi-agency response to help them to
understand and to reduce the risks associated with their behaviours.


Childrens physical, emotional and mental health needs are considered, and
appropriate services are put in place to meet identified need. These include
effective support and intervention from CareLink, the well-regarded local
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) for children looked after.
However, childrens physical health needs are not always assessed quickly
enough, and the quality of health assessments is not consistently strong.


The virtual school maintains a sound oversight of childrens progress and
attainment, particularly of those who are at risk of under-achievement and
those who have poor school attendance. Managers of the virtual school
understand well the strengths and areas for improvement of the service and
are taking effective action to tackle these. Overall, most children looked after
attend a good school regularly, receive good support and make positive
progress.


Children benefit from additional support provided by new posts in the virtual
school, funded by the pupil premium grant. This is leading to improvements
for children looked after, for example, in the attainment of those at key stage
when they do not evidence sufficiently the progress that children are making.
They act as effective advocates for children, leading to more timely
assessments of their educational needs. They also liaise effectively with
professionals, including those outside of the local authority area, so that
children are placed in settings that best meets their needs.


Children looked after achieve well at key stage 2 and key stage 4 and do
better than those in similar areas. However, the attainment gap between
children looked after and their peers remains wide. As a result of good


support when young people complete Year 11, the vast majority move into
and stay in education, training and employment.

Increasingly, children have an up-to-date personal education plan (PEP).
However, the quality of PEPs varies too much, and the virtual school is
working hard with social workers and schools to continuously improve the
quality of PEPs.


Diversity is considered well for the majority of children looked after. This
includes careful consideration during matching for placements, including ways
in which childrens needs will be met when a full cultural placement match is
not possible.


Children looked after are encouraged to engage in positive leisure activities.
Social workers and carers are supported to prioritise social, educational and
recreational activities for children. However, not all foster carers are aware of
their delegated authority to sanction activities for children in their care.


The local authority has limited success at placing brothers and sisters
together, and many siblings live separately due to lack of placement choice.
Together or apart assessments are not consistently timely or of sufficient
quality to fully inform childrens plans. The large majority of children looked
after benefit from carefully considered contact with their families. This ranges
from letter box and supervised contact, through to child-directed, flexible
contact for older children and young people.


Too many children experience numerous changes of placement that are not in
accordance with their care plans. While the majority of children are matched
appropriately according to their needs, there are also some children who are
placed with carers or in residential units that do not meet their needs or
adequately safeguard them. Placement stability for children, both long term
and short term, is declining.


The majority of childrens plans and reviews do not sufficiently consider
childrens personalities, and many fail to identify childrens capacity to make
and sustain friendships. Some plans do not adequately address issues such as
health needs or the impact of a disability for the child. The majority do
consider childrens basic needs and leisure time preferences. However, there
is not sufficiently strong oversight or challenge by managers and IROs when
plans for children are not progressed quickly enough. Decision-making and the
rationale for decisions are not always clear in childrens case records. This
means that children seeking to understand their care histories later in life
would not be able to fully comprehend their care journeys. Current
performance regarding the timeliness of reviews is not strong and is not being
addressed with sufficient urgency.



The learning and health needs of children who are looked after outside the
local authority area are not always sufficiently considered when their
placements change. This means that, for many of the large number of
children living in other local authority areas, education and health services are
secured only after they have moved into their new placements. Children living
at a distance are also more likely than others to experience delays in having
their care plans reviewed or their health needs assessed.


There is not a sufficient range of high-quality placement options available for
adolescents, particularly those who present challenging behaviours to their
carers. This lack of sufficiency leads to a significant number of placements
that repeatedly break down for these young people. The progress towards
meeting this gap, which was identified in 2014, has been too slow. There is a
suitable range of placement options for children under 10 years of age.


Actions taken to recruit foster carers have had very limited impact. In 2016
approved. This is despite actively seeking to recruit through regular drop-in
and information sessions, and existing foster carers being offered an
introduction bonus for any future carers. There are currently eight foster
carers undergoing assessments and four waiting for assessments to
commence.


The quality of decision-making when placing children is further hampered by
the variable quality of referrals for placements. There are too many referrals
that do not provide sufficient overview of childrens personalities or of their
range of needs and issues, to support effective matching decisions.


There is a wide range of training offered to foster carers that is highly valued
by them. This includes recent training on a more therapeutic approach to
caring for children. Oversight of foster carers ongoing suitability requires
improvement. Record-keeping is poor, and there is a lack of rigour in
addressing Disclosure and Barring Service checks and ensuring that foster
carers training is current.


Early plans are being made, especially for younger children, to achieve
permanence through an appropriate range of permanency options, including
SGOs, connected persons placements and adoption. Potential connected
persons carers and special guardians are assessed thoroughly for their
suitability. Special guardians, and the children living with them, are effectively
supported when needs arise through direct work with social workers and
therapeutic input by CareLink.


Social workers, Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) guardians and IROs liaise effectively regarding childrens plans for
permanence through legal orders. However, most children wait too long to
achieve permanence when they are in long-term foster placements. This


means that children may be prevented from building strong, enduring
relationships with their carers until firm agreements are reached. This is
further hampered when life story work is delayed or in need of updating.
Some life story work is excellent and has helped children to explore difficult
issues with their carers.

Speakerbox, the Children in Care Council, has an open membership policy to
engage a wide range of children looked after. Speakerbox has achieved a
great deal over the past year, including developing training materials to help
professionals to understand how important it is that they carefully consider
contact between brothers and sisters for children who are looked after.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding

Early consideration of permanence for children is an embedded approach
throughout the social work teams in Southwark, and adoption is considered
for all children. Children and adopters receive high-quality support from a
stable, experienced and well-trained workforce, resulting in children benefiting
from a permanent home.


Adoption is identified promptly as a potential permanency arrangement.
Permanency consultations occur quickly between the adoption team and
safeguarding and assessment teams, resulting in a thorough and early
understanding of childrens needs by the receiving permanency team. When
adoption is the agreed plan for the child, the allocated social worker remains
with the child through to the stage when an adoption order is made. This
attention to continuity means that children develop good, trusting
relationships with their social workers.


Child permanence reports are of high quality, clearly demonstrating the needs
and characters of children. The reports are regularly updated, providing
prospective adopters with a contemporary picture of children, in addition to
their background histories. Social workers know their children well, and
sensitively and accurately describe childrens profiles.


Life story work is of high quality. Comprehensive and sensitive descriptions of
the reasons for children entering care, histories of their birth families and their
cultural identities through pictures and photographs provide helpful
illustrations. The books also include details of foster families and childrens
new families. Some adoptive parents spoke of how they regularly refer to the
books with their children to help them to understand their pasts. Later life
letters are clear, accurate and sensitively written.


Careful management oversight of childrens progress towards adoptive or
other permanent placements is achieved through a range of effective
processes. These include a tracker, efficient caseload management and


regular, reflective supervision, resulting in consistently high standards of
casework. All options to find the right families for children are pursued,
including the South London consortium, Link Maker, the adoption register and
national advertising. Close working relationships in the adoption team mean
that, when potential adopters are either being assessed or have recently
successfully completed their assessments, potential matches for children are
speedily identified. Family-finding processes effectively match children, and
anonymised child profiles circulated during care proceedings ensure early
exploration of opportunities to find permanent families for children.

Arrangements to monitor the progress of children who are subject to an
adoption plan are strong, with rigorous senior management tracking of
timeliness through permanency taskforce meetings. The average timescales
between children entering care and moving into adoptive placements, and
between placement orders and matching, are improving. When there were
delays, inspectors saw justifiable reasons in each case, ensuring the right
outcomes for children. Fourteen of the 20 matches reviewed by the panel in
the year preceding the inspection had been within 91 days. At the time of the
inspection, there were eight children waiting for adoption. Two of these were
brothers linked to adopters, with a panel date imminent. Active and persistent
family finding was in progress for the other children, including detailed
together or apart assessments.


Foster to adopt is well established in Southwark, reflected through 10
placements. A clear understanding of early permanence is demonstrated
through two recent adoptions of relinquished babies, following swift referrals
from the pre-birth team to the adoption team. A skilled and experienced social
worker uses regular recruitment drop-ins as an opportunity to explain this
option to all prospective adopters.


Adopter preparation is excellent. Adopters described a necessarily challenging
process, resulting in their feeling well prepared for becoming adoptive
parents. Preparation for adoption training was highly regarded by a group of
adopters spoken to by an inspector. Southwark is part of the South London
consortium, which enables adopters to readily access training courses. One
adopter spoke of how well supported she felt through her social worker
attending a course with her.


Prospective adopter reports are analytical, demonstrating a thorough
exploration of relevant issues. Hypotheses are tested through group
supervision, and effective management oversight results in high-quality and
timely assessments. Checks and references are completed and clearly
documented. Adopters from a wide range of backgrounds are approved,
reflecting the diverse ethnic communities in Southwark. This includes single
carers and same sex couples.



When a child requires an assessment and possible therapeutic support prior to
adoption, clinical psychologists, the medical officer and the social worker meet
with prospective adopters to ensure that they have a clear understanding of
the current and potential future needs of the child. Adopters told inspectors
that this means that they are fully aware of the complex needs of their
children. Adoption support plans are clear and detailed in identifying how
future needs will be met. All adopters spoken to were clear about how to
access support in the future.


Robust quality assurance processes ensure that panel reports are of a
consistently high standard. The recently merged adoption and fostering panel
benefits from an experienced, knowledgeable chair, and panel membership is
suitably diverse. Minutes demonstrate quorate meetings, ensuring effective
oversight of adoption decisions. The agency decision-maker is suitably
qualified and experienced, and decisions are made promptly. Adopters
described positive experiences of panel to the inspector. However, the chair
and agency decision-maker have yet to meet since the merging of the panels,
and this is a missed opportunity.


The post-adoption support service features motivated and skilled practitioners.
Adopters seen during the inspection praised the support that they received
from the local authority, providing examples of the authoritys tenacious
support to ensure that children received the help that they needed. A
comprehensive range of post-adoption support groups is available, including a
weekly play session, a group for adopters who are waiting and an adult
support group. Social workers apply their learning and experience effectively
in their direct work with families. Inspectors saw examples of families
supported to manage complex behaviours. When specialist support was
required, this was readily available either through the local CAMHS service, or
through a wide spectrum of commissioned provision.


There have been no adoption disruptions in the two years preceding the
inspection, indicating that post-adoption support in place for children and
families is effective.


Good use is made of the adoption support fund in order to provide specific
therapeutic interventions for children and to provide training and support to
parents. Adopters highly rate the service that they receive from Southwark,
informing the inspectors that they get things done.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement

Managers, social workers and personal advisers are highly committed to
supporting young people leaving care, so that they achieve well and make a
successful transition to adult life. New management arrangements and the
recently established dedicated leaving care team are improving the quality of
support that young people receive and building on areas of good
performance.


Managers are developing a positive culture that is improving the services
available to care leavers. However, the support that care leavers receive is
inconsistent, and, for too many, it does not enable them to make sufficient
progress across the different aspects of their lives.


The quality of pathway planning to meet young peoples needs is too variable.
As a result of recent action by managers, the majority of young people now
have an up-to-date pathway plan. However, the needs of a significant
minority of young people are not sufficiently understood by staff and, as a
result, planning does not fully reflect the specific needs of individuals. Plans
are not always clear as to the specific measures that staff will pursue to
reduce any evident risks to young people, such as repeat missing episodes or
time out of education.


Personal advisers and social workers are increasingly having regular contact
with young people on their caseload, and most young people are seen
regularly. However, for a significant minority this is not the case. In some
instances, managers are slow to intervene when staff are not progressing
work in a timely way. This results in delays to young people receiving the
support and help that they need to move forward in their lives.


Young people who spoke to inspectors hold mixed views about the quality of
the relationship that they have with, and the support that they received from,
their personal advisers or social workers. Some feel that staff leave them to
fend for themselves and that they have too little communication with their
worker, in particular when they turn 18 years of age or are at university.
However, others hold their social worker or personal adviser in very high
regard and gave examples of when they have benefited from very effective
help, for example in being supported to find suitable accommodation and
training.


There is a good range of financial support available to young people to
support their transition to adulthood, such as travel costs to attend college,
accommodation costs during university holiday periods and allowances to set
up their first home. However, young people are not sufficiently aware of their
entitlements, including the financial support available to them, if they attend


university, or the practical help that they should receive when they become 18
years old. In a minority of cases, young people do not receive sufficient help
to ensure that basic, essential necessities, such as their passport, national
insurance number and bank account, are in place.

Most young people receive good support to achieve their education,
employment and training (EET) goals, benefiting from the specialist advice
and guidance available. Published data shows that the proportion of young
people in EET is around the same as that in other areas. However, more
recent local data shows that approximately three quarters of young people
aged over 19 years old are in some form of EET, which is a comparatively
high proportion. Most young people who spoke to inspectors feel that they
receive good support to progress in their education and career goals, although
this is not universal. In a minority of cases, there are delays in putting the
additional help in place that young people need to achieve their next step in
EET.


A good proportion of young people are at university. However, young people
were not wholly positive about the support that they receive while at
university. For example, some reported a lack of help in navigating the
housing options available, and others feel that they are left on their own when
they begin their courses.


Young people who spoke to inspectors feel safe where they live. Social
workers and personal advisers provide effective support to young people that
helps them to find accommodation that best meets their needs. As a result, a
good proportion of young people live in suitable accommodation. Staff
effectively promote the option of young people remaining with their foster
carers when they turn 18 years old. Consequently, approximately a fifth of
current care leavers are doing so. Bed and breakfast accommodation is never
used, and use of houses of multiple occupation is extremely rare.


At the last inspection, care leavers felt that they did not receive enough
support in preparing for independent living. Young people who met with
inspectors at this inspection had very mixed views on the support that they
receive to live independently, and they feel that they need more help,
particularly in managing money, despite pre-tenancy training and training in
budgeting being available.


Young people have their basic health needs met, and most are registered with
a local doctor and dentist and are aware of the range of help available so that
they can live healthily. Young people receive regular reminders from workers
about their health appointments, and, increasingly, those aged 17 are
attending their health checks and receiving a summary of their health histories
so that they are well placed to manage their own health appointments.



Young people are not sufficiently aware of how to complain, should they be
dissatisfied with aspects of the support that they receive. Some feel that they
are not listened to when they express dissatisfaction over aspects of the
service that they receive and they find managers hard to reach.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The local authority has a comprehensive understanding of the complex needs of
the community and has developed adaptable and creative services to respond to
local need. The senior leadership team has been strengthened, and four new
assistant director posts were appointed to in 2016. Significant improvement work
in recent months has enabled service performance reviews to be completed and
compliance and quality issues to be addressed. Service plans are in place to
address all of those areas of practice that are not yet consistently strong. Progress
in performance can be seen in the adoption service, the front door and the MASH.
However, services for children looked after and care leavers are still too variable.
Services to survivors of female genital mutilation and children at risk of sexual
exploitation demonstrate improvement and strong practice.
A culture of high support and high challenge is promoted, and areas of good
practice are celebrated and learning widely disseminated. Innovative practice is
actively sought and developed, for example, with the award winning Pause
project. This outward-looking professional culture enables good social work to
flourish in many areas.
The newly formed quality assurance unit provides good performance data and
undertakes valuable monitoring and practice reviews. Following a transfer to a new
electronic case management system, data has not yet been fully cleansed.
Consequently, child in need and childrens review information is not yet available in
a comprehensive format. This remains a significant gap.
There is a strong, shared corporate ownership and ambition to improve outcomes
for children, extending across the local authority partnerships. Strong, passionate
and committed political support and challenge are enabling the local authority to
make continuous improvements. Mature strategic partnerships are a strength and
translate into good operational practices.
Children and young people are at the heart of all services. They are involved in all
areas of decision-making, service planning, scrutiny and challenge and are fully
integrated in the development of childrens services.
Workforce development continues to be a priority. Promoting the social work
matters model of practice and creating widely available learning and development
opportunities are having a positive impact on sickness rates and staff turnover.
Although some children reported that they have had a high number of social
workers, this is partly attributed to internal changes, which have been made to
improve the quality of services.


Inspection findings

Since the last inspection, the senior leadership team has changed. The
strategic director of childrens and adult services, the statutory DCS, was
appointed in October 2014, and a director of children and families services
was appointed in June 2016. Following these appointments, there was a
finding of too much inconsistent practice across services. This stems from the
mixed impact of the implementation of the social work matters practice
model, introduced in 2014. This model is based on systemic practice, small
teams, widespread use of clinical and group supervision and evidence-based
approaches.


The senior management structure has been strengthened over the last year to
accelerate change and improvement. Four new assistant director level posts
have been created and appointments made. The progressive impact of this
additional senior management investment is becoming evident. There is
rigorous and regular oversight of the performance of frontline managers, and
weaker performance is being determinedly addressed through high support
and high challenge. The full impact for children of this rigorous management
approach is yet to be demonstrated across all service areas.


Strong political leadership in the local authority demonstrates commitment
and ambition for vulnerable children. This thread is evident throughout all of
the local authoritys priorities and plans. Members have protected the
childrens social care budget for a further three years, allowing substantial
continuing investment in workforce transformation.


The lead member for children is an active participating observer on the LSCB
and the corporate parenting committee, demonstrating a thorough
understanding and knowledge of the priorities of childrens services. The chair
of the scrutiny committee for children is also highly effective and has been
instrumental in developing innovative service models. This supports a strong
multi-agency approach to issues affecting vulnerable children in the local
authority.


A comprehensive joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA), which included a
consultation with more than 1,000 children, parents, carers, staff and
practitioners, informed the local authoritys formation of its strategic priorities
for children.


Children are very active in all of the local authority meetings that affect them.
Speakerbox and Changemakers are participation forums that children and
young people regularly attend, to give advice and challenge. Young people
consistently told inspectors that they feel valued and respected when they
attend. Children are also involved in the recruitment and training of staff, new
policy developments and ways of working. One of many examples of their
impact is the way that care leavers exit interviews are conducted. This has


improved through better engagement with young people. This ingrained
participation is a real strength in the local authority.

Social work in Southwark is largely child focused, and the views of children
are actively sought and demonstrated. Currently, 96% of children looked after
participate in their reviews. Further work is under way to support children in
attending their child protection conferences and core groups. However, in the
care teams, the voice of children is not sufficiently clear in assessments and
plans.


Mature strategic and operational partnerships are prominent. Partnership
working is strong through all services provided for children. Working
arrangements between highly committed elected members, the LSCB chair,
the strategic director of childrens and adult services and the chief executive
are compliant with statutory guidance. These arrangements are underpinned
by appropriate formal governance protocols, so that senior officers are
regularly held to account. Recent effective partnership service delivery has
been evidenced in services, effectively addressing female genital mutilation
and child sexual exploitation. Both of these areas have been strengthened and
improvements made to frontline practice and services through an embedded
multi-agency approach.


The local authority has recently been successful in three Department for
Education (DfE) innovation bids. Bids feature improved services to care
leavers, expansion of the family group conference offer and a further
extension to the Pause project, working with women who are vulnerable to
having children repeatedly taken into care. This demonstrates commitment
and high ambition for continuous improvement and development of services.
The senior leadership team is passionate that service delivery continues to
meet the emerging needs of vulnerable children and families in Southwark.
Senior leaders ensure that they maintain a direct line of sight to frontline
services, and they meet regularly with children and young people from
Speakerbox and other users of the services that they provide.


The recently formed quality and performance improvement service has
introduced a framework that brings together three main elements of
performance management: quality assurance, practice review and regular
performance monitoring. Examples of the framework include recent deep
dive scrutiny of the front door and early help services. This has resulted in
positive changes in the MASH and instigated an early help service review.


Performance data is provided to managers at all levels and to support scrutiny
in council meetings. This is largely provided in a useful and clear format.
Recently, the corporate parenting committee requested case studies to help
its understanding of the meaning of the data produced, which were
subsequently provided. Data cleansing is ongoing in important areas, such as


child in need performance data. However, the voices and experiences of
children are not sufficiently prominent in performance reports.

The provision of high-quality placements for children looked after, particularly
for adolescents, is insufficient. The sufficiency strategy for post-16
accommodation for young people leaving care has recently been refreshed.
The needs analysis and scoping involved a wide range of relevant parties,
including the integral participation of young people. The strategy aims to
rationalise current service provision to ensure that it is fit for purpose for the
future. The commissioning and provision of early help services are also under
review.


There is a comprehensive workforce development plan, which covers a wide
range of learning opportunities. An academy is currently under development,
which will further strengthen the considerable training and development
opportunities already available for staff and students. The extensive learning
and development programme of the LSCB complements the local authority
programme. This provides access to a broad range of learning opportunities,
including short and long courses, accredited and non-accredited programmes,
bite-size sessions and regular conferences.


Expected standards of social workers and managers performance are high.
Careful support is provided to staff who underperform, and assertive action is
taken to manage staff who are unable to improve. However, there is currently
no skills audit or detailed record of social workers or managers current levels
of training and development.


Most staff who spoke to inspectors feel well supported. Low sickness levels
and a comparatively low turnover of social workers support this finding.
Retention rates of social workers are relatively good, compared with similar
London boroughs. Expectations of social workers standards are high, and
managers are actively supporting and challenging under-performance,
resulting in some staff turnover. There are too many changes of social
workers for children who are looked after, but this is primarily due to recent
internal challenges and changes, intended to stabilise the allocation of social
workers over the long term. Weekly practice supervision sessions in the
safeguarding and assessment sets include clinical and advanced practitioners,
enabling staff to examine and hypothesise about the impact of their work with
children and families. However, this practice model has not yet been
consistently applied within the care and care leavers sets. In addition to the
weekly sessions, monthly one-to-one supervision takes place for most staff.
There are some instances, particularly in the children looked after and care
leavers service, where drift and delay in some service provision for children
are evident as a result of weaker management oversight.


Due to the inconsistent implementation of the social work matters model, the
role of the clinical practitioner has recently been reviewed. The outcome was


the creation of a clinical lead post, which aims to improve standards and
support clinical practitioners learning and development. This initiative,
coupled with the rigorous support and challenge of poor performance of some
frontline managers, further demonstrates the ambition of senior leaders to
provide good-quality services to all vulnerable children.


Senior leaders know themselves well. Strategic documents and action plans
succinctly draw together areas for improvement. These prioritise similar areas
highlighted in this inspection. Substantial improvements have been achieved
in the adoption and permanence service and the MASH. Service developments
and improvements have been secured through working effectively with
partners, creating a culture of continuous improvement and, above all, having
an ambition for improved outcomes for children at the heart of services. A
high number of children looked after attend good or outstanding schools in
the borough, and additional, focused home tuition is provided to boost core
subjects. The local authoritys virtual headteacher is proactive in ensuring
effective provision.

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
The independent chair of the LSCB provides strong leadership. Since his arrival in
a strong focus on safeguarding children, a streamlined structure, clear priorities
and a culture of challenge across the partnership. The impact of the LSCBs work is
evident across a range of areas. There are well-established links between the
LSCB, the Health and Wellbeing Board and other relevant strategic forums. These
arrangements allow the Board to ensure that childrens safeguarding issues remain
high on everyones agenda. Childrens and adults safeguarding arrangements have
been aligned to ensure greater synergy and a focus on the family. This reduces
duplication, improves efficiency and promotes a shared understanding of issues
such as gangs and female genital mutilation.
The LSCB has completed an ambitious programme of audits. These, together with
ongoing scrutiny of issues and information from performance data, ensure
continuous and effective monitoring of frontline practice. A new performance
management framework is helping to ensure greater understanding of practice.
However, further work is required to embed the use of data in the Boards subgroups.
The Board has been instrumental in developing work around key issues, such as
radicalisation, female genital mutilation, gangs and child sexual exploitation. There
has been an extensive training programme and media campaigns on child sexual
exploitation, resulting in increased identification and more prosecutions.
The group of young people who work with the board, the Changemakers, is a
valued and integral partner in delivering the safeguarding agenda. The group
undertakes meaningful and innovative work that has impacted on partners
understanding of issues and resulted in changes to services.
There is a comprehensive LSCB learning strategy, aligned to the Boards priorities.
Training is informed by learning and annual evaluation of impact. This work now
needs to be built on, with closer analyses of the needs and gaps in the workforce
across the partnership.
The annual business plan is not sufficiently clear and lacks measurable outcomes.
Risks and concerns are not always explicit. As a result, the system for monitoring
important issues and actions requires strengthening.


Recommendations

Embed the performance framework into the work of the sub-groups, ensuring
that relevant performance data informs analysis and evaluation of services.


Undertake analysis of workforce training needs and gaps in order to ensure
that training is relevant and targeted effectively.


Ensure that the annual business plan is specific, measureable and time-limited
and strengthen the systems for tracking actions, risks and concerns.


Continue to develop a clearer understanding and more appropriate application
of thresholds for referrals to childrens social care across partner agencies.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The LSCB in Southwark has strong and effective governance arrangements to
ensure that all partners are fulfilling their statutory duties to safeguard
children. The chair of the LSCB provides strong and clear leadership. He is
well respected and influential, and has relentlessly driven forward work to
ensure improvements. This has resulted in a strong focus on safeguarding
children, a streamlined structure, clear priorities and a culture of openness
and healthy challenge across the partnership. The Board embraces continuous
improvement, recognises areas for development and responds to ongoing
emerging safeguarding issues across the local authority.


There is strong communication between the LSCB, the Health and Wellbeing
Board, multi-agency forums and senior officers across the partnership. These
arrangements allow the Board to ensure that childrens safeguarding issues
remain high on everyones agenda. In 2015, the LSCB chair also became the
chair of the adult safeguarding board. Since that time, work has taken place
to bring the two boards and other strategic forums together. The community
safety partnership, Safer Southwark, is now part of the adult safeguarding
board. Revised sub-group arrangements mean that the two boards share
relevant sub-groups, such as human resources, community engagement and
practice, development and training. There is a shared partnership forum, and
twice each year the boards come together to discuss priority areas of work.


While work is still taking place to finalise these arrangements, this alignment
of the two safeguarding boards has resulted in greater synergy and a holistic
focus on families. It reduces duplication, improves efficiency and promotes
shared understanding and better joint working to address issues such as
gangs and female genital mutilation. However, the governance protocol from



The LSCB and the local authority hold each other to account. The LSCB chair
works closely with the statutory DCS, the chief executive, cabinet members
and the leader of the council. As a result, the Board is active and influential in
planning and informing services.


There is a strong and engaged partnership. The LSCB includes a wide range
of appropriate partners. Attendance at all meetings is high, and partners
report that they attend regularly because the meetings are valuable. Board
meetings frequently include more than 35 people. They are well managed and
focused and include time for breakout discussions on key subjects. One
partner described Southwarks approach as collegiate, and this is reflected in
the number of different agencies chairing the 11 sub-groups and being
involved in reviews and shared task and finish groups. An example of this is
the current work to review the Boards oversight of children who have a
disability.


The partners commitment to the Board is apparent, not only in the time that
they give to the LSCB, but also in the financial contributions made. The Board
increased its budget in 201617, and partners have agreed additional core
funding for 201718 in order to expand the support team for the childrens
and adults safeguarding boards to include an additional analyst and two
partnership officers.


The Board receives and reviews a range of relevant reports and updates that
are scrutinised and challenged. An example of this is a report on private
fostering arrangements. The Boards scrutiny led to awareness raising in the
community and a greater understanding of how private fostering is identified.
This has resulted in an increase in private fostering notifications.


While challenge and scrutiny are part of all of the Boards work, the system
for tracking areas of concern and risks, through a forward plan and minutes of
meetings, is not thorough enough. It does not sufficiently identify risks or
those areas that the Board is concerned about.


There is a clear learning and improvement framework, and the partnership
embarked on an ambitious programme of multi-agency audits in 2015. Audits
have included child protection processes, parental mental health, home
education, children missing education, child sexual exploitation, child
protection plans for children who have a disability, adolescents, neglect and
the MASH. These, together with regular reporting of single-agency audits,
ensure continuous and effective monitoring of frontline practice.


The Board has introduced a performance management framework. This helps
to ensure a greater understanding of practice and informs challenge. An
example of this is the Boards concern about an increase in childrens social
care referrals. This challenge led to a MASH audit and a revision of the
threshold document, and helped the local authority to identify changes to the


management arrangements for early help services. While the Board routinely
considers performance data, it acknowledges that more work is needed to
embed data into the work of sub-groups. Education and training data requires
strengthening, and the multi-agency sexual exploitation (MASE) panel and
human resource dashboards require further work to align partners data.

Partner agencies prioritise safeguarding. The annual section 11 audits of
safeguarding arrangements, undertaken by most agencies, demonstrate this.
There is good analysis and scrutiny through a multi-agency challenge panel.
All partners have individual action plans, and the Board collates key themes to
inform its work. The Board recognises that this process needs to be extended
to schools and more voluntary and community sector groups across the local
authority. A task and finish group has been set up to explore how changes
can help these agencies to become more involved in the process.


The child death overview panel (CDOP) and its sub-group, the neonatal death
overview panel (NDOP), are shared with another local authority area. They
are effective and benefit from a broader understanding of a larger population.
They demonstrate learning and impact and are integral to the Boards work.


The SCR group provides a rigorous system for consideration of serious
incidents and dissemination of learning from all case reviewing activity. During
the inspection, the SCR for Child U was published. It highlights improvements
required in information sharing and work with gangs and knife crime. Learning
events, as part of the SCR process, have taken place, and an action plan is
about to be implemented.


The Board has been instrumental in developing work on key issues, such as
preventing violent extremism and female genital mutilation. It has undertaken
considerable work on child sexual exploitation and established a tactical MASE
group at director level, which reports to the Board. All agencies have given a
pledge to tackle child sexual exploitation. There has been a large-scale
training programme. The risk of child sexual exploitation is part of the school
curriculum and an extensive media campaign included e-newsletters to
thousands of residents. As a result, there are improved understanding and
identification of child sexual exploitation, and this is evidenced by an increase
in prosecutions and coordinated disruption activity across the borough.


The young peoples group working with the board, the Southwark
Changemakers, is a valued partner in delivering the safeguarding agenda.
The group has representation at the chairs sub-group, and young people
regularly present their findings to the Board on the broad range of topic-based
work that they are doing. Since the beginning of 2016, the group has
undertaken meaningful and innovative work, which has impacted on partners
understanding of issues. A good example of this is the current work to
develop a range of text messages to help girls to support peers who might be
involved in child sexual exploitation. The group of 12 changemakers has


close links to other young peoples engagement groups and, as a result, is
able to reach a large population of children. This is illustrated by the groups
survey of 800 children to capture the issues most important to children across
the borough.

There is a clear and comprehensive LSCB learning strategy, aligned to the
Boards priorities. It includes all levels, from practitioners to senior managers,
the Board and elected members. Partners are involved in the commissioning
of training to ensure that external training reflects Southwark issues and ways
of working. A four-stage evaluation process evaluates the impact of training
on practice and an annual evaluation, with other learning, informs the annual
training calendar. However, a more detailed needs and gap analysis of the
workforce is now required to ensure that people are receiving the training that
they need and to inform the number of courses required.


The LSCB annual report 201617 provides a rigorous and transparent
overview of its work. Findings from the report inform the annual business
plan, which details work in each of the six priority areas, and this underpins
work plans for each of the subgroups. However, while all of the actions within
the Boards control have been completed, the business plan does not include
timescales or identify who is taking forward actions. This makes it difficult to
ensure that work is on track.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of seven of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Nick Stacey
Deputy lead inspector: Rachel Holden
Team inspectors: Alison Smale, Jansy Kelly, Anne Waterman, Jon Bowman, Natalie
Trentham
Senior data analyst: Tania Corbin
Quality assurance manager: Sean Tarpey


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


