South Tyneside
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 11 September 2017  5 October 2017
Report published: 24 November 2017

Childrens services in South Tyneside are good

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Senior leaders in South Tyneside are ambitious and have been effective in securing
swift improvements to the quality of services for children and families. The senior
leadership team has systematically and comprehensively addressed shortfalls
identified in the joint targeted area inspection (JTAI) in February 2016, and
outcomes for children in need of help and protection and children looked after are
improving and are now good. Now that statutory compliance is met, the local
authority is appropriately focused on securing consistently high-quality services for
all children.
The chief executive is resolute in his ambition to provide outstanding services for
children in South Tyneside and has recruited a senior leadership team that shares his
ambition. The director of childrens services (DCS), who took up post in 2016, has
taken a systematic approach to improving services for children. The pace of change
is impressive and there is demonstrable impact in relation to a range of outcomes for
children. Senior leaders have ensured that staff development and support have been
prioritised effectively, and staff morale is good. The workforce is stable, motivated
and child-focused. Social workers have access to a comprehensive range of flexible
and responsive training and development. Social workers know their children well
and they undertake sensitive and creative direct work. However, management
challenge is not consistently robust, and although social workers receive regular
supervision this is overly focused on compliance rather than addressing areas where
the quality of practice could be improved.
Multi-agency partnerships are strong and dynamic. There is a shared understanding
of the vision for children and families, and this is leading to the effective
management of risk and appropriately focused service provision. The response to
children who are at risk of sexual exploitation and domestic abuse is rigorous,
reducing risks to the most vulnerable children effectively. A wide range of early help
and targeted services are utilised to support children and families.
While some services have rapidly improved, there are missed opportunities to use
intelligence effectively in relation to return home interviews and the multi-agency risk
assessment conference (MARAC). While appropriate action is taken to safeguard
children, information shared is not consistently translated into planning for individual
children or always used to inform the broader strategic response.
There is an effective multi-agency response to children in need of help and
protection. Childrens needs are assessed promptly and thoroughly, and risks are
identified, reduced and reviewed regularly. However, the use of written agreements
with parents, particularly where domestic abuse is an issue, is not reducing risks to
children in some cases. Contingency planning is not consistently specific or
meaningful to parents.
Children become looked after when they need to be so. Outcomes relating to
childrens health and education are good. Effective matching is supporting placement


stability well and this is good. Independent reviewing officers (IROs) offer effective
oversight, review and challenge of childrens cases, and this is leading to timely
permanence. Foster carers are well trained and supported to meet childrens needs,
although not all carers are provided with timely delegated authority to make day-today decisions for the children they care for. The local authority has recently taken
action to improve oversight of this service, and this includes improving the timeliness
of foster carer reviews.
Adoption services are outstanding. Children are benefiting from permanence plans at
the earliest opportunity. The service matches and supports children and families
effectively. Life-story work is creative and beautifully presented for each child,
helping them to understand their life journey.
Services to care leavers are good. Recent improvements to the service have ensured
that personal advisers (PAs) have time to concentrate on and support care leavers
well. Young people know their rights and have good access to health services, and
the quality of accommodation is good. The proportion of care leavers aged 16 to 19
years who are in education, employment and training is well above the national
average. However, this is not replicated for care leavers aged 19 to 21 years, and
the proportion here is well below the national average. The response from the local
authority and corporate parents has been slow to address this issue, but firm plans
are now being implemented.
Childrens engagement and participation in shaping services are an ongoing area of
focus for leaders. Advocacy is not well used, and the council is not monitoring
childrens use of the complaints process effectively. The service is not using learning
to inform service developments effectively.
Corporate parents have not provided sufficiently robust challenge to the local
authority and partners when services are not achieving good outcomes for children,
for example in relation to care leavers aged 19 to 21 who are not in education,
employment and training.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about the local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about the local authority area
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates two registered childrens homes. Both were judged
to be good in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was published in June 2013. The local authority was judged to be
adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was published in June 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since March 2016.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services, public health and commissioning.
 The chief executive has been in post since January 2010.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) has been in post since
September 2015.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 29,511 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in South Tyneside. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 28% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years old are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 22% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 21% (the national average is 14%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 7% of all
children living in the area, compared to 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people who speak English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 6% (the national average is 21%)
 in secondary schools is 5% (the national average is 16%).


Child protection in this area
 At September 2017, 1,166 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At September 2017, 196 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 66 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 182
children (60 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At September 2017, one child lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is unchanged from one at 31 March 2017.
 In the two years prior to inspection, seven serious incident notifications have
been submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At September 2017, 276 children are being looked after by the local authority (a
rate of 94 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 275 (93 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2017.
Of this number:
authority area
 one lives in a residential special school out of the authority area
 no children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 26 adoptions
returned to be looked after
living
 no young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in houses
in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that all staff receive challenging, reflective and directive supervision
that addresses the quality of practice and planning for all children effectively.


Ensure that all children are actively engaged in return home interviews and
that the intelligence is consistently used to reduce individual risk and inform
strategic planning.


Ensure that all childrens plans clearly reflect current circumstances and offer
clear contingency for children and families; and that written agreements with
parents reduce risks to children effectively where domestic abuse is a concern.


Continue to work with partners to increase the numbers of care leavers aged


Continue to improve the engagement and participation of children and young
people through providing accessible advocacy services and ensuring that
children and families know how to complain and that any learning is used to
inform service developments.


Ensure that foster carers are provided with more timely delegated authority in
order to undertake their role.


Increase the impact of corporate parents on holding services to account by
ensuring that the voice of children is heard more clearly.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children in South Tyneside are good. This is because managers and
social workers try their hardest to make sure that services are the best they can
be. Sometimes, extra help is needed to make sure that children are safe. When
this happens, everyone works closely together to make sure that this happens
quickly. Social workers, police, health professionals and schools work together
well so that children can get the right help at the right time.
 Social workers listen carefully to what children tell them and understand what
they need to do to help. This includes providing extra support for parents and
carers. Children and young people told us that they have good relationships with
their social workers. The social workers write good assessments about what
needs to change.
 If children have to leave their families, social workers make sure that they live
with people that will care for them and help them to be healthy and do well at
school. Social workers need to be clearer with foster carers about what decisions
they can make without having to ask parents. When it is safe for children to go
back home, they are helped to do so with lots of support to make it work.
 Children and young people have the right to speak to someone called an
advocate who is independent of their social worker, and to have access to an
independent visitor if they would like one. If there are concerns about the quality
of services, then young people and their families need to know that they can
make a complaint. The local authority needs to do more work to make sure that
children can have their say.
 For children who are unable to go home, social workers help to find another
family or another place for them to live. Social workers try very hard to make
sure that they can find the best family for them to live with.
 Young people who leave care still have the support of an adviser who will
continue to help them when they need it, and to ensure that they live in safe
accommodation. PAs develop excellent relationships with young people. They
work extremely hard to make sure that care leavers feel safe and happy and are
supported in college or work. Care leavers aged 19 to 21 need more help to get
into work, training or college. Although most of their health needs are met
quickly, some young people wait too long to see health specialists to support
them with their emotional well-being. PAs and social workers make sure that they
keep in regular contact. They help care leavers work on skills that they need to
live on their own, such as managing money and cooking.
 Care leavers told inspectors about a very small number of things that they would
like to see improved. For example, two care leavers said that they would like
more help to understand their childhood and to see their files more quickly when
they ask for them.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children in need of help and protection in South Tyneside are protected through
effective multi-agency working in the Integrated Safeguarding and Intervention
Team (ISIT). Thresholds are understood and well applied to ensure that children
receive the right service at the right time. Children and their families have access
to a range of accessible and good-quality early help services, which support them
well when problems first emerge. The early help offer is developing, and further
improvements have recently been made to the effectiveness of the lower-level
response and coordination between early help services and childrens social care.
When children are at risk of immediate harm, a quick response ensures that they
are protected and that risk is reduced. Child protection strategy meetings and
enquiries involve wide multi-agency representation to inform robust decisionmaking, and decisive actions are taken to protect children.
Children have their needs assessed promptly, and assessments are mostly of good
quality. This leads to plans that reduce risk and are regularly reviewed to monitor
progress, although contingency plans are not always clear for families, and some
childrens plans are not updated between reviews when additional risks are
identified. Social workers and family workers undertake direct work with children,
which is often creative and is sensitively undertaken to inform assessment and
care planning. The response from the out-of-hours service is robust and effective,
working seamlessly with day services.
The multi-agency response to children at risk of domestic abuse and child sexual
exploitation or criminal exploitation is rigorous and provides effective support. A
multi-agency project, which builds on learning from a successful police-led
operation, is having a positive impact on reducing risk for children. Social workers
demonstrate an understanding of domestic abuse, although at times there is an
over-reliance on written parental agreements, which places unrealistic expectations
on the victim.
All children reported missing from home are offered return home interviews, but
further work is needed to encourage more children to engage so that the
information gathered is of sufficient quality to inform individual and strategic
planning. The local authority tracks children who are missing from education
effectively to ensure that they are safe, and children who are educated at home
are well monitored.
The assessment of and provision for homeless 16 to 17-year-olds is prompt and
highly effective. Good partnership working across supported accommodation
providers ensures that young people are offered suitable housing and ongoing
support that meet their needs.


Inspection findings

The arrangements to help and protect children in South Tyneside are
effective. When concerns first emerge, children and their families benefit from
a good range of early help services. Following a recent review of early help
services, there is improved coordination of provision through the multi-agency
allocations team, and this is ensuring a responsive offer of support for
families. The early help assessments seen by inspectors were of good quality.
Plans are appropriately focused on improving outcomes for children and
families, and this includes some proactive work with fathers.


There is a good understanding by partner agencies of the thresholds for
access to childrens social care, which means that the majority of referrals are
appropriate and timely. Effective screening within the recently introduced
multi-agency ISIT ensures a prompt and proportionate response to risk. This
includes high-risk domestic abuse concerns and facilitates timely assessments
and interventions. Consent is well understood and applied appropriately. The
number of children living in households in which neglect is a feature is
significant in South Tyneside. The graded care profile has recently been
introduced to help social workers identify when a child might be at risk of
neglect, although it is too soon to assess the impact of this.


When children are at risk of significant harm, responses are thorough and well
coordinated. This includes the out-of-hours social work service, which provides
a seamless and robust response to children, with effective communication
between daytime and evening services.


Multi-agency representation within ISIT is a particular strength. Strategy
meetings are well attended. Comprehensive information-sharing between
partners and effective identification of risk and protective factors is leading to
good-quality decisions. Actions taken to protect children are robust and
appropriately focused.


Child protection conferences are timely and well attended by partner agencies,
which results in well-informed multi-agency decision-making. Some children
attend their conferences when it is appropriate for them to do so, and their
voice is heard effectively through the consultation process. However,
advocates are not well used. Robust monitoring of plans by the child
protection chairs ensures that children do not stay on plans for too long, and
appropriate action is taken when circumstances do not change to protect
children, although contingency planning is not always specific or meaningful to
parents. (Recommendation)


Social work assessments are generally of good quality and identify well the
presenting needs and risks. They make good use of historical information.
However, the impact of identity and diversity is not consistently well
considered. This includes the different needs of younger children. An


understanding of the cumulative impact of domestic abuse, parental mental illhealth and substance misuse is not well articulated. This means that, for some
children, services are not as appropriately focused as they could be.

Children in need of help and protection are seen regularly and their views are
clearly understood and recorded. Social workers are knowledgeable about the
children they work with and use creative tools to carry out some effective
direct work to better understand the childs lived experience. Family workers
are offering effective support alongside social workers and are having a
positive impact on improving childrens and familys outcomes.


The majority of childrens plans are well focused and responsive to changing
needs through regular review. Partner agencies contribute well. However,
some plans are overly adult-focused, are not updated when further
information is known and lack timescales to facilitate robust monitoring of
progress. Newly introduced plans are starting to help social workers to better
articulate to parents the areas causing concern and what needs to happen
next, but it is too soon to see the impact of this in all cases.


Management oversight and supervision are regular but are not offering
consistently good challenge about the quality of social work practice. There
are missed opportunities for a small number of children for whom decisions
could have been taken earlier to instigate protective actions.
(Recommendation)


When concerns for children are escalated or situations for children do not
change, pre-proceedings letters very successfully make the expectations clear
for families about what they need to do to make the required changes.


Services to meet the needs of children who have disabilities are responsive
and effective. A recent restructure has ensured more manageable caseloads,
and this has supported the development of meaningful relationships with
children and families. Assessments are well written and child-focused, with a
clear consideration of the impact of the childs disability in the context of the
whole family.


Children who are at risk of child sexual exploitation receive a well-coordinated
multi-agency response through the Missing, Sexual Exploitation and Trafficked
(MSET) group. Risks are identified and social workers and managers take
appropriate action to protect these children. However, this is not always
updated in the existing care plan, which reduces the holistic understanding of
the childs needs. The local multi-agency project Sanctuary South is
particularly effective in helping to reduce harm safely. Inspectors saw
examples of extremely positive intervention and support, which has enabled
successful disruption and a significant reduction in the risk for several young
people.



For children who go missing from home, return home interviews are always
offered but are not consistently taken up. There is further work to do to
ensure childrens better engagement. When interviews take place, information
is of a poor quality and is not being used effectively to inform individual or
strategic planning. (Recommendation)


There are robust arrangements in place for children missing from education. A
named manager coordinates children missing from school effectively. Effective
and clear procedures are in place to support children who are home educated
and their families. Currently, 68 children are being electively home educated.
Each registered family is visited twice a year, when the progress of children is
assessed, guidance and support are offered and alternatives suggested if this
is appropriate.


There are effective arrangements for the identification, intervention and
management of significant risk and harm by adults within the multi-agency
public protection arrangements. However, for children living in families in
which there are higher levels of risk from domestic abuse, the response from
partners through the MARAC is not always translated effectively into childrens
individual plans. While action is taken to protect children, this means that a
holistic view of the childs experiences is, in some instances, not clear. The use
of written agreements between parents is not always reducing risk, as there is
sometimes an over-reliance on the adult victims to protect children.
(Recommendation)


The assessment and provision for homeless 16 to 17-year-olds is prompt and
highly effective. This is supported by a single access point. Emergency
accommodation is available when needed. Good partnership working across
supported accommodation providers ensures that young people are offered
suitable housing and ongoing support that meet their needs.


Private fostering arrangements are suitably assessed and supported, although
the current number of children in South Tyneside remains very low despite a
range of suitable awareness-raising activity being available.


The management of allegations against professionals working with children is
robust. The majority of investigations are tracked and monitored effectively by
designated officers. Regular training, awareness-raising and supportive
conversations with other agencies have all had an impact on the reduction of
inappropriate referrals.


South Tyneside is an area where the occurrence of female genital mutilation is
low, but much has been done to respond to and raise awareness of the issue.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Decisions for children to become looked after are based on a comprehensive
assessment of risk and need, and are appropriate and, for the vast majority,
timely. Children enjoy positive and purposeful relationships with their social
workers and the people who care for and support them. Permanence for children is
well promoted. Children are placed with well-matched carers who meet their needs
effectively. The majority of children live in stable and good-quality placements,
although not all carers are provided with timely delegated authority to make dayto-day decisions for the children they care for. The local authority has recently
taken action to improve oversight of this service, including improvements in the
timeliness of foster carer annual reviews.
Childrens participation in their looked after reviews is strong. IROs are very
effective in their roles. Some children have access to an independent advocate,
and when this offer is taken this is effective and not time-limited. However, takeup of advocacy is low. The local authority is in the process of reinvigorating the
service. Proactive and purposeful partnership work by the virtual school ensures
that children looked after progress and achieve well educationally. The health
needs of children are identified and supported well.
Risk to children looked after who go missing and are at risk of sexual exploitation
is well understood and responded to. However, sufficient effort is not always made
to ensure that return home interviews take place and are of appropriate depth to
inform individual or strategic planning.
Adoption services are outstanding. Children with a plan for adoption are identified
early, prepared well to live with their adoptive families and benefit from
permanence without delay. The highly skilled team carefully prepares and supports
adopters through high-quality assessments, preparation training and post-adoption
support. Children progress well in their adoptive homes.
Services for care leavers are good. Young people live in safe and supportive
housing and are well supported. While the majority of care leavers aged 16 to 19
are in education, employment and training, too many aged 19 to 21 are not, and
even though they are supported the impact of additional workplace services is yet
to be seen.
The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is a well-engaged team of young people who
work hard to connect with and seek the views of children looked after. It has an
increasing voice on behalf of children looked after in South Tyneside and is starting
to have a positive impact on shaping services.


Inspection findings

Children who are on the edge of care receive effective support to help them to
remain at home when it is safe to do so. Family workers provide intensive
support to enable children to remain safely with their families. They provide
evidence-based parenting support, direct work and intensive support
programmes. The local authority has identified a need to strengthen edge of
care services, and has very recently implemented a targeted edge of care
service for children aged 10 to 15 years. The full impact of this is too early to
assess.


Appropriate decisions are made for children to become looked after in South
Tyneside. These are based on comprehensive assessments of risk and need.
Consistently applied thresholds for care result in the right children becoming
looked after. Social workers are attuned to the children they work with. They
see them regularly and understand their personalities and individual needs.
Inspectors saw examples of sensitive direct work and engagement with
children, helping them to understand and manage their early childhood
experiences. Social workers maintain regular direct contact with children and
see children alone, so that positive and purposeful relationships can be
nurtured.


Legal permanence for the majority of children is secured in a timely way.
Effective tracking systems are in place to monitor timely progression of
childrens cases through the Public Law Outline (PLO). This process ensures
that delays are reduced and are well understood, and service managers
monitor this weekly to reduce unnecessary delay. Delays are in the main due
to court scheduling. Working relationships between the local authority, the
Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the
judiciary are well established and very positive. Social workers produce goodquality, thorough assessments and reports for the court. These ensure that
legal permanence for children is achieved without delay.


The local authority supports children being cared for by their birth families
effectively, where this is possible and it is assessed as safe to do so.
Connected persons and special guardianship assessments are balanced and
evaluative and carefully weigh analyses of strengths and vulnerabilities. A
clear evaluation of applicants capacities to safeguard children and to provide
nurturing parenting throughout their childhoods is evident.


The vast majority of children are placed in stable, good-quality placements
that meet their needs. Children do not experience unnecessary moves and
there is generally a good range of placements available, sourced and
managed by the commissioning team through a well-established regional
commissioning framework. A review of placements is under way, and service
redesign is taking place in response to recognised shortfalls in the sufficiency
of placement choice for family groups and older teenagers who display


challenging behaviour. This is being progressed by targeted advertising and
recruitment.

Careful consideration is given to placement suitability for children who have
complex needs. The correct choice of placements has contributed significantly
to reducing risk of child sexual exploitation and missing episodes. Placements
that can meet the diverse needs of children have resulted in children making
positive progress in a range of areas of their lives.


Foster carer assessments are comprehensive and evaluative with
recommendations for best potential matching. Foster carer reviews lead to
clear personal development plans. However, not all reviews are completed in a
timely manner, and this is not conducive to ensuring that placements continue
to meet childrens needs. A dedicated reviewing officer has recently been
appointed to address this shortfall. In addition, not all carers are provided with
timely delegated authority to make day-to-day decisions for the children they
care for, and this reduces their ability to make timely decisions for children.
(Recommendation)


Contact with family and friends is appropriate to the childs needs and is well
supported. Contact plans are clear, fully discussed with foster carers and are
reviewed if foster carers report any adverse reactions or behaviours following
a contact visit. This consistency and attention to detail ensures that contacts
remain appropriate and positive for children.


There is currently limited capacity to undertake life-story work in the fostering
service, and some children have been waiting a long time for this work to
start. The local authority recognises this and has plans in place to address it.
When it takes place, life-story work is creative and effective. Examples seen
by inspectors show considerable evidence of multiple strands of evidence
being gathered to ensure that all of the childs history is captured.


Most children looked after who are living outside the area live in neighbouring
local authorities and are relatively close to their homes. Children who are
placed a distance away are placed for the right reasons and in their long-term
best interests. Social workers visit these children regularly, and their
communication with the children and care providers is good.


Strong working relationships across agencies are evident and contribute to
achieving good outcomes for children. There is good multi-agency attendance
at key meetings, and information-sharing is timely and effective in influencing
childrens plans. Access to services and support is readily available to children.
Children who live out of area and those placed at home receive an equitable
service.


Children are returned to parents care when it is safe for them to be so. This is
informed by comprehensive assessments ratified at the childs looked after
review. Childrens views are well recorded and effective direct work is


undertaken with them and their families. The majority of children have a
detailed plan to support their return home.

Risks associated with going missing and child sexual exploitation are well
understood. When children go missing from their placement, including out of
area placements, the police are alerted in a timely way and appropriate
information-sharing takes place. However, sufficient effort is not always made
to ensure that return home interviews take place and are of appropriate depth
to fully inform plans. Children who are being exploited or who are at risk of
child sexual exploitation have multi-agency plans to reduce the risk and these
are regularly reviewed. (Recommendation)


Children looked after who offend benefit from a well-coordinated response to
meeting their needs, underpinned by regular communication between social
workers and youth offending service officers.


The educational progress of the 186 children of school age is prioritised and
scrutinised effectively by secure governance arrangements, which means that
the virtual headteacher is regularly challenged and the service is held to
account. The current cohort of children attend 84 different schools, the vast
majority of which (90%) are good or better. A very high proportion of pupils
have additional learning needs and these are being well supported.


A well-established and highly effective virtual school team, the Project for
Looked After Childrens Education (PLACE) proactively tracks, monitors and
supports all young people, including care leavers, up to the age of 18.
Personal education plans (PEPs) are used well to focus its work, which is
firmly rooted in supporting childrens educational progress, particularly those
experiencing emotional difficulties, trauma and loss. The pupil premium is
being used well to ensure one-to-one provision where necessary and access to
a counselling service for pupils who need it.


The impact of the work of PLACE means that the vast majority of pupils are
attending school regularly and attendance rates are high at 97%. Pupils are
generally making expected levels of progress in line with their peers.
Attainment is mostly in line with the national average for children looked after
in the majority of key attainment and progress indicators. A very small
number of pupils have had a fixed-term exclusion during the last year. Very
few pupils have moved schools other than in normal transition periods. This is
because PLACE places a high priority on school stability, and children are only
moved in exceptional circumstances.


Good arrangements are in place to ensure that when young people are not
attending school full-time they receive high-quality alternative provision that
meets their needs. A suitable range of provision is available for young people
to access across the borough when it is clear that mainstream schooling is not
suitable or they have been temporarily excluded. Currently, five pupils who


are in care are accessing this provision. The local pupil referral unit, the
Beacon Centre, provides the majority of places along with the local college.

The health needs of children looked after are given early careful consideration
when they enter care and are routinely addressed in case planning. Children
have access to a variety of commissioned services. Foster carers have direct
access to psychological advice to promote attachment and placement stability.
Childrens initial and review health assessments are completed for the majority
in a timely way. A lead professional is identified for children whose health
assessment indicates that additional support is required. Initial access to child
and adolescent mental health services is in line with the national average but
can take some time. However, once carer and child are receiving a service,
the response is highly valued.


The quality of assessments is generally good. They are clear and
comprehensive and inform childrens plans. However, the assessed needs of
children who remain looked after are not always updated periodically or when
a childs circumstances change. Sensitive responses to childrens individual
needs are evident in care planning. A high significance is placed on the
enduring relationships between brothers and sisters, and they live together if
their needs determine that this is appropriate. Children also have good access
to an independent visitor who is matched according to the childs requests.


Childrens reviews are timely and effective. Almost all children participate in
their reviews in some way, and their wishes and feelings are carefully
considered in care planning. IROs visit children between reviews, when
possible. They apply rigour in their role and are effective in ensuring that care
plans progress in a timely way and meet childrens needs. Care plans are not
always of consistently good quality. However, the majority address the needs
of children well. The IROs escalate issues appropriately on behalf of children
looked after. Social workers and managers are receptive to and value
professional challenge from the IROs, and this has on occasion resulted in
appropriate amendment of care plans.


All children have the right to access an independent advocate, and when this
offer is taken this is effective and not time-limited. However, take-up of
advocacy is low and under-promoted. The local authority is in the process of
reinvigorating the service. (Recommendation)


The CiCC, MAGIC (Making A Great Important Change), is a well-engaged
group of young people who work hard to connect with and seek the views of
children looked after. They are active in the region to increase greater
consistency of opportunities for children looked after. Children at MAGIC said
that they feel listened to and are enabled to make a difference, which makes
them feel good about their contributions. Children in care in South Tyneside
can now access free leisure passes, with an additional free pass being
available for a friend or their carer. The CiCC has an increasing voice on behalf
of children looked after and is starting to have a positive impact.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is
outstanding

The performance of the adoption service is excellent and the local authority
continues to seek ways to improve its service. Children who need an adoptive
placement are identified early and benefit from permanence without delay,
and 67% are placed with adopters in under 14 months, which is much better
than the national average of 47%. The authority has been highly successful in
ensuring that harder to place children are adopted. The 2016 adoption
scorecard demonstrates that the proportion of Black and ethnic minority
children and children aged five and over who ceased being in care due to
adoption is more than twice the average national levels.


Family-finding is robust and social workers demonstrate tenacity and success
in finding families for children who have diverse and complex needs. Fostering
to adopt and parallel planning are well established and secure excellent
outcomes for children. Support for this challenging type of pre-adoption work
is outstanding, and there is evidence of adoption workers being available
overnight and at weekends. Creative use is successfully made of national
activity days, adopter-led matching and regional consortium exchange days.


Matching is a strength and all efforts are made by the adoption service to
secure the right household for each child. Evidence was seen of tenacious and
creative work to secure an adopter for a child who has complex needs.
Brothers and sisters are placed together whenever this is possible, and
independent assessments are commissioned early in their care experience
when the collective nature of their needs may give rise to the question of
separation. The adoption panel is stable and robust, providing a sensitive
forum for prospective adopters to present themselves. Good consideration is
given to the planning for provision of support services if a child is to be placed
away from the local area. The agency decision-maker has detailed knowledge
of childrens circumstances and makes timely, appropriate decisions. Medical
advice is thorough, valued and readily available to both panel and prospective
adopters.


Management oversight of the service is well informed and very effective. In
been individually reviewed by the agency decision-maker and service
managers to maximise learning and to assure themselves that decisionmaking and care planning, both within the authority and in external bodies,
such as the court, are appropriate.


Managers track the progress of children with an adoption plan from the
earliest possible stage to plan ahead, and this avoids drift and delay. Child
placement reports are good in the majority of cases and action has been


taken to raise standards further. Work remains to be done to ensure that all
attain that degree of quality.

Adopters are overwhelmingly positive about the support they receive from the
service, and many apply to the authority as a result of the positive
experiences of others. A comprehensive training package is available for
prospective adopters. Preparation covers areas such as child development,
abuse, legal issues, attachment, contact and positive parenting. Good-quality
and relevant training is offered post-placement, ensuring that adopters
continue to have the knowledge and skills to meet the needs of their children.
To ensure that childrens views about their adoption experiences are known
and understood, a DVD of them was produced and is to be used in training for
potential adopters and the corporate parenting panel.


The focus is on supporting adopters in an effort to achieve the very best
outcomes and standards of care for children. An example of this is the use of
the adoption support fund to secure a much-valued clinical psychologist whom
adopters can access with ease and without delay from pre-placement until
their adopted child is an adult. This results in challenging behaviours and
attachment issues, both at home and in school, being addressed as they arise,
and there have been no placement disruptions in the last 12 months.


Adoption support was provided to 13 families in the last year, and support
ranged from therapy sessions for children, attachment training for adopters to
a Talk Adoption summer camp for children. However, adoption support plans
have historically been too variable in quality, and in July of this year managers
took action to remedy this by auditing all active plans and identifying
necessary improvements.


The After Adoption service, provides effective services for adopted people
aged over 18, and birth parents, who are seeking advice, information and
counselling. Quarterly reports demonstrate the sustained use and positive
impact of this service.


Adopted children and their families benefit from high-quality life-story work. A
specialist worker is extremely skilled at not only building sensitive and factual
accounts of childrens lives but supporting and guiding adopters in how to use
them to best effect with their children. Later-life letters are clear and well
written, describing the childs journey and the decisions made about them in a
very sensitive manner.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care
leavers is that it is good

Care leavers are well supported by their PAs who are committed and
persistent, especially with those young people who are more difficult to


engage. As a result, they know and are in touch with all of the 118 care
leavers currently using the service. As one care leaver put it, My worker was
brilliant and especially when I was going through a difficult time. He helped
me get my apprenticeship, which I absolutely love. A recent reorganisation of
the team has enabled the personal advisers to concentrate on their work with
care leavers. This is having an impact on developing a more professional
approach to the work. As a result, work is focused and ensures that care
leavers are both supported and challenged to help them make positive choices
and keep them safe.

Young people spoken to by inspectors have a well-developed understanding of
their rights and entitlements. A care leavers resource pack was developed in
collaboration with MAGIC. However, the pack needs to be more interactive,
engaging and accessible, so a web-based resource is planned by MAGIC. PAs
ensure that young people are kept informed about the range of help that is
available, including financial support.


Pathway plans are current, up to date and regularly reviewed. The plans are
helpful and support young people in making successful transitions and
increasing their independence. All of the plans reviewed by inspectors were of
good quality. Plans are detailed, generally evaluative and record some useful
historic information about the young persons journey through care. Targets
are appropriate and realistic and include input from the young person. This
means that for the vast majority, pathway planning helps care leavers to
review what is going well, to prioritise areas they need to focus on and to take
responsibility for their actions. Care leavers spoken to for the inspection
confirmed that they find the pathway planning process helpful.


A small number of care leavers spoken to by inspectors said that they would
like more work done to help them understand their childhood experiences and
early histories. Plans are in place to develop high-quality later-life letters and
life-story work when these are not in place. This will help care leavers to
reconcile their childhood experiences and build resilience. However, at
present, care leavers are waiting too long to access their files.


Young people have consistent and good support to develop independent living
skills. For example, PAs work with them to make sure that they have bank
accounts, a national insurance number and passports. When care leavers
move into their own property, they are supported effectively by
accommodation partners in developing daily living skills including budgeting,
paying their rent and utility bills, shopping and cooking for themselves. If care
leavers have lived in residential homes, outreach staff continue to work with
them once they move out. A number of care leavers have received financial
support for driving lessons, particularly when they need to drive because of
their employment. This means that, for the vast majority, their transition to
adult life is positive and they feel well supported.



For those care leavers who have additional needs or a disability, very effective
planning is in place to ensure that they continue to receive well-tailored
support into adulthood at a level that is appropriate for them. For example,
when necessary, fostering arrangements continue and become shared lives
placements so that young people can remain with the same families. When
appropriate, adult social care takes the lead to ensure that care and support
are seamless with few, if any, disruptions.


Care leavers physical health needs are addressed effectively through the work
of the PAs and wider health partners. Particularly good attention is paid to
advising them about alcohol and drug use and other risky lifestyle choices. All
care leavers are provided with a health passport that ensures that important
information about any health issues is recorded and available for future
reference. Young people have good access to specialist sexual health services
and, in some cases, have developed a very trusting relationship with the
sexual health nurse working in the team. When young people become
parents, they are well supported by community health services and through
childrens centres to ensure that their own health and that of their babies is
well supported.


Care leavers have appropriate access to a variety of services to address their
emotional well-being. The Life Cycle service is available for those young
people who have mild to moderate mental health concerns and issues about
anxiety. Care leavers are responded to promptly. The PLACE has recently
appointed a counsellor for children looked after and care leavers, but take-up
of this new service is low at present. For those young people who have more
complex mental health needs, referrals are made via their general practitioner
to the community treatment team. Recent improvements in this service are
ensuring a prompter response for those care leavers over the age of 18.
However, some young people spoken to by inspectors feel that they have
waited too long, and some are still waiting for an appropriate service.


A wide range of housing options is available to care leavers to ensure that
they are well supported to move into suitable accommodation that meets their
individual needs. The weekly Housing Allocation Pathway Planning and
Support group enables all referrals for accommodation to be responded to
promptly. Once a referral is made, young people are offered options that
range from highly supported living arrangements to those with less support
including who have their own tenancies. Care leavers are given priority in the
bidding process for council tenancies. These seldom break down, as young
people are encouraged to take the next steps in a timely way to suit them.


A very small number of care leavers feel that the area they are currently living
in is unsafe. They have raised this with their workers and moves are already
planned. Inspectors visited these properties during the inspection and were
satisfied that these young people are housed safely. As one young person
said, The area is OK, not the best but not the worst.



Increasingly, care leavers are offered the opportunity to stay put with their
foster carers. The five care leavers currently attending university are able to
return to their previous foster care placements, or alternative accommodation
can be provided during holiday periods if this is required.


The vast majority of care leavers aged 16 to 18 are well supported to continue
their education and training or enter the world of work. A recently developed
post-16 PEP is having a positive impact on focusing attention on the next
steps that young people need to take in their education. Good relationships
with local colleges and training providers mean that their progress is being
carefully monitored, and young people are attending training programmes that
meet their needs.


Unfortunately, the more positive picture for the 16 to 18 cohort of care leavers
being supported to continue their education and training is not replicated for
the older cohort aged 19 to 21. Currently, a significant proportion of this
group are not in education, employment or training (NEET). A number of
these young people are not able to work, for example, because they have
recently become parents or are suffering from anxiety and depression.
(Recommendation)


The council has been too slow in offering this older cohort of care leavers
work experience or apprenticeships across the council. Staff have recognised
that more needs to be done to reduce the number of care leavers who are
NEET. A new service, The Workplace, has been established, which will be
devoted to helping care leavers back into education, training or work. Briefing
meetings are planned with the council across a wide range of departments to
encourage teams to consider offering care leavers work experience, taster
programmes and, where appropriate, apprenticeships. As this initiative is so
new, it is too early to determine how successful these measures will be in
reducing the number of care leavers who are NEET.


Young people have good access to free leisure services, and this offer now
includes the opportunity to take a friend. Young people said that they really
like the fact that they can attend the gym or take a friend swimming if they
want to.


PAs celebrate young peoples individual achievements in a variety of ways, for
example taking them out for meals when they successfully complete their
academic qualifications, birthday dinners and Christmas celebrations. Care
leavers receive praise and encouragement for their other successes, for
example gaining their driving licences, gaining employment, becoming parents
or moving into their own homes. While these individual celebrations are
appreciated by the young people, care leavers successes are not part of a
wider celebration event. Currently, care leavers are being consulted about
how they would like to celebrate their achievements more widely.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Leaders and managers in South Tyneside are ambitious and tenacious in their
pursuit to deliver outstanding services. Rapid improvements have been achieved,
and ongoing work is well focused. Well-cultivated relationships with partners
enable the local authority to be nimble in developing better services to help and
protect children. Over the last 18 months, the DCS has taken a systematic
approach to improvement, prioritising areas of greatest impact. He has progressed
the redesign of the front door through ISIT, restructured and significantly
improved the team for disabled children and embedded a culture of quality
assurance and performance, while ensuring that the workforce is well supported to
develop key skills to improve the quality of practice.
Senior managers and leaders are determined in their approach to understand
frontline practice, and there is effective performance management and quality
assurance. All of the areas identified through this inspection are already well
understood and included in improvement planning.
Some areas of development are still not mature enough to measure impact. For
example, work is ongoing to broaden the reach of MAGIC to capture the views of
children, which is a strength individually. However, as a collective voice, this is not
yet shaping and influencing service developments. Learning from advocacy and
complaints is not yet collated and analysed to understand what children are saying
about the quality of services they receive, or used to inform improvements.
The chief executive, DCS and head of service set high standards, and ensure a
clear line of accountability across the service, while fostering an environment that
supports best practice through its significant commitment to ongoing professional
development. This strong offer enables the local authority to recruit, as well as
retain, staff effectively, despite regional pressures and influences. Staff feel valued
and proud to work for the local authority.
As the local authority has already identified, challenge and rigour of management
oversight are not sufficiently focused on improving the quality of practice or on
providing clear management direction to avoid any unnecessary delay. Although
social workers receive regular supervision, this is not sufficiently reflective or of a
consistently good quality.
Corporate parents have not been sufficiently challenging of shortfalls in services,
for example in relation to care leavers aged 19 to 21 who are NEET.


Inspection findings

The chief executive is a passionate advocate for children and young people,
and this has secured good-quality services. Since the 2013 Ofsted inspection,
childrens social care budgets have been protected and additional monies
made available to implement a new electronic recording system, redesign the
front door through ISIT and further invest in edge of care services. There has
been successful recruitment of senior managers who share a commitment to
continual improvement. Following the JTAI in February 2016, the DCS has
systematically improved a number of service areas, prioritising areas of
greatest impact. The pace of change has been impressive. The front door
through ISIT is restructured, and there are significant improvements to
services for children who have disabilities. A culture of quality assurance and
performance is well embedded. The workforce is stable and well supported.
The right conditions have been created for social work to flourish now that
statutory compliance requirements are met.


Senior leaders and managers have invested in building and retaining strong
and trusting relationships with partners. Partners share the same vision and
values and understand the strength of working together to shape and commit
resources, and deliver improved services for children and young people. For
example, there has been good investment by partners in relation to the
implementation of ISIT and Encompass, a domestic abuse initiative in schools,
and in tackling children at risk of exploitation. This demonstrates effective
commitment from partners to secure timely and appropriate services for
children.


Since the JTAI in February 2016, the local authority and partners have focused
on improving the response to children at risk of exploitation and children who
go missing from school, home and care, and they are successfully delivering
highly effective services through Sanctuary South. Intelligence is collated and
shared, informing targeted disruption activities, and there is appropriate focus
on improving further services to children who go missing.


Neglect is a significant feature of children who need help and protection in
South Tyneside. The local authority has invested in understanding its nature
and prevalence, identifying geographical hot spots and uncovering a common
factor of domestic abuse through its impressive neglect profile. Work with the
community safety partnership ensures the availability of a broad range of
domestic abuse services, and the neglect profile is used to identify gaps in
provision. For example, external funding was secured to target families in
which the toxic trio is prevalent and inhibiting parents ability to engage in
interventions. However, this is very new and the impact is yet to be
measured.


Positive relationships with Cafcass and the courts and effective monitoring of
the PLO mean that the progression of childrens cases through the court
system is improving. Assessments and care plans have improved in quality,


demonstrating good impact of targeted training. IROs provide effective
challenge to the local authority, including appropriate escalation of concerns
when necessary to the head of service and to Cafcass.

Clear lines of accountability and robust governance arrangements ensure
effective communication and challenge at all levels across the service. Regular
meetings between the chief executive and the independent chair of the South
Tyneside Safeguarding Children Board (STSCB) and fortnightly meetings
between the lead member and DCS are ensuring accountability. The lead
member has a clear overview and understanding of frontline practice from
chairing the corporate parenting committee, and the Children and Families
Board and through attending the Health and Wellbeing Board and STSCB. Her
knowledge is enhanced through a genuine commitment to improving practice
through regular visits to teams and operational meetings as additional
assurance about the quality of services for children and young people.


The corporate parenting committee has been refreshed to provide improved
strategic oversight of the newly developed strategy for children looked after
and care leavers. There is clear member commitment articulated; however,
this is not translated into strong challenge. For example, there has been
insufficient challenge of service quality for care leavers. The council has been
too slow to provide apprenticeships and to improve education, training and
employment opportunities for 19 to 21-year-olds. Priorities set are not
ambitious and they are not enabling members to hold the service to account.
(Recommendation)


The chief executive and DCS have a clear line of sight to frontline practice,
and this has been a key factor in securing service improvement. They have
good levels of contact with partner agencies and social work teams and
dedicated sessions with MAGIC. Regular childrens services performance
information is provided, independent from the DCS, directly through the
performance team. This identifies areas for further investigation through
deep-dive sessions, and he works collaboratively with staff to quickly mobilise
resources to address issues.


Children contribute effectively to their assessments and plans. However, as a
collective voice, they are not yet shaping and influencing services. The local
authority has taken action to improve this, and a newly recruited participation
and engagement manager has broadened the reach of MAGIC and introduced
six-monthly sessions with MAGIC, the DCS and head of service to provide a
platform for young people to hold senior managers to account. However,
these developments are not yet mature enough to enable children and young
people to inform, shape and improve the services they receive. Advocacy is
not well used, and the council is not monitoring childrens use of the
complaints process effectively. Learning from these sources is not
systematically analysed to inform, change and improve practice. This is a
missed opportunity to understand what children are saying about the services
they receive. (Recommendation)



The local authority meets the requirements of the sufficiency duty and
supports local foster carers effectively to promote placement stability.
Successful regional consortium arrangements allow the local authority to
manage demand and match children effectively with carers who can best
meet their needs. The profile of children looked after is well understood, and
the local authority responds effectively to their changing needs. For example,
the high prevalence of older children entering care has led to a review of the
provision of edge of care and respite services for children aged 10 to 16 and
additional investment in providing foster carers with enhanced payments for
skills to meet the needs of children with more challenging behaviour.


Following considerable focus over the last 18 months, a coherent and
intelligent performance management and quality assurance framework is now
embedded and is successfully enabling managers to identify and be proactive
about tackling areas of concern. Managers receive a range of useful
performance information, and monthly performance clinics establish priority
areas to inform thematic audits. Information is routinely scrutinised, well
understood and used effectively to improve services. For example, visits to
children in need within expected timescales increased from 45% in 2016 to


Audit activity is systematically used to improve practice. Audits are part of
routine practice and completed by all levels of the service, including the DCS.
Individual findings are discussed with social workers, promoting a shared
understanding of good practice. This provides an impressive foundation for
service improvement, drawing together regular performance information to
inform audit activity, set improvement targets, align resources to meet these
improvements and inform social worker training. Consequently, leaders and
managers know themselves very well. Issues raised by the inspection team
are well understood and included in their ongoing improvement plan.


Workforce development is a significant strength, and there is a very strong
commitment to continuing professional development. South Tyneside
appropriately prioritises recruitment and retention of high-quality
professionals. The local authoritys work with universities provides good
opportunities for placements for students. This has been a key foundation for
change and improvement in childrens services. The local authority has
invested in creating a culture in which social work can flourish. Practice weeks
are having a positive influence on upskilling and refreshing skills across the
workforce. Daily emails linking to research and practice, book clubs, use of
webinars, lunchtime seminars, direct training, guest speakers, children- and
young people-led workshops and specific team activity are making a positive
difference and helping to embed a learning culture. The redesigned assessed
support year in employment offer has increased reflection time and the
alignment of employee performance management (annual appraisal) with the
healthcare professional council standards, and dedicated management training
is supplemented by coaching and mentoring.



While management oversight of cases is regular, management challenge is
not consistently robust. Although social workers receive regular supervision,
this is not of consistently good quality. Where this is weaker, recorded
supervision provides an update on childrens circumstances, as opposed to
providing challenge and direction where there are delays in meeting childrens
needs and progressing plans. In these instances managers are overly focused
on compliance rather than on addressing where the quality of practice could
be improved. (Recommendation)


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
South Tyneside Safeguarding Children Board meets its statutory requirements
effectively. Strong governance, with priorities clearly aligned to key areas for
safeguarding children, has ensured that the board is increasingly influential in
improving the quality of services to children.
Partnerships are strong with wide representation, commitment and a healthy
culture of challenge. The board has appropriate representation from key partner
agencies, and the influence of the board chair ensures that partners are held to
account for safeguarding children. The board is responsive, influential and
ambitious, driving developments and improvements in key services, such as
responses to child sexual exploitation, the Prevent duty and services for children
who have disabilities.
The multi-agency response to tackling MSET children has been very successful in
developing a clear strategy, raising awareness and coordinating disruption and
prevention activities.
The board is a learning organisation. Multi-agency challenge and commitment to
safeguarding are seen through the comprehensive analysis of information from a
range of sources, including audits, serious case reviews, child deaths and external
inspections. However, despite some improvements, performance data is not
always good enough to enable partners to robustly challenge the effectiveness of
services. For example, data on return home interviews is currently reported as
those offered, not those undertaken, and data in respect of early help services is
underdeveloped.
The boards response to ensuring the quality of services for children living out of
area has not been prioritised. This is a significant deficit given that these children
are particularly vulnerable and often have complex needs.
The comprehensive training offer from the board is well aligned to the strategic
priorities of partnerships to improve working practice in safeguarding children and
improving outcomes.
STSCB is engaging well with children and young people to raise issues of
safeguarding. The locally based drama production Is This Your Story? about child
sexual exploitation, social media and consent has been well received and has
resulted in some children asking for support.


Recommendations

Ensure that the quality of services for children living out of area is reported
and considered by partners.


Improve the quality of performance data to inform partners and enhance
challenge.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

Strong, clearly defined governance arrangements, combined with highly
effective and committed partnerships, ensure that the board meets its
statutory responsibilities well. The board has appropriate representation from
key partner agencies and there are effective links to the local Children and
Families Board and Health and Wellbeing Board. The board chair was
instrumental in the development of the Childrens Multi-Agency Leadership
Group and has been proactive in extending the influence of the board,
undertaking annual meetings with the chief executives of partner agencies
and headteachers. The influence of the board has also been strengthened
through close collaboration between STSCB and the Safeguarding Adults
Board (SAB).


The 20162017 STSCB annual report provides a comprehensive analysis of
the performance, effectiveness, impact and influence of the board. This is
enhanced by the boards self-assessment, which is regularly updated to
provide a contemporary overview of the work of the board. The current selfassessment provides an accurate evaluation overall, providing examples of
good practice and identifying where further improvements are required to
safeguarding children in South Tyneside.


The STSCB strategic plan 20142018 is ambitious and appropriately reflects
the key priorities for the partnerships in safeguarding children. Priorities are
reviewed at least annually through consultation with children, analysis of
performance data, outcomes of audits, learning reviews and changing
priorities. This ensures a consistent focus on important issues for children. The
detailed STSCB business plan provides a valuable framework to monitor
progress in relation to the priorities. The board manager maintains and
monitors the action log issues raised in meetings.


Comprehensive up-to-date policies and procedures that meet current statutory
requirements are commissioned through a sub-regional consortium of local
authorities. These are available online and are updated to reflect any national
developments and legislative changes. The board also reviews the policies and
procedures on a rolling basis to ensure that they are current and relevant to
South Tyneside.



Board members have a clear understanding of their responsibilities. They
demonstrate enthusiasm and commitment to safeguarding children in South
Tyneside. They are knowledgeable about the key priorities and challenges for
the board. Members of the board acknowledge that during the last two years
the board, under the current chair, has had an improved focus on
safeguarding children. This is due to the strength of partnership relationships,
which support effective challenge and improvement; for example, in the rigour
of the multi-agency response to the areas for improvement identified in April
Rigorous monitoring of the improvement plan, as well as development of
strategies and delivery of training, have led to improvements in services and
outcomes for children, in particular improvements to service delivery within
the children and disabilities service and the work of the neglect working group
to develop the multi-agency neglect strategy proposal.


In addition to the improvements following the JTAI, the board has also been
highly influential in the development of the ISIT and promoting the increased
police representation within ISIT. In response to domestic abuse, the board
has also driven the coordinated multi-agency assessment against domestic
abuse and the provision of independent domestic violence advisers in hospital
settings.


The highly efficient strategic responses to MSET children have been
strengthened through the alignment of the strategic group with SAB to
provide an additional focus on vulnerable adults. The MSET operational
subgroup of the STSCB reports to the strategic group to ensure that important
intelligence is shared. The MSET group has been very successful in developing
a clear strategy, raising awareness and coordinating disruption and prevention
activities. The MSET group also developed and delivered training to multiagency practitioners. The training has been invaluable in raising awareness of
child sexual exploitation. For example, the training of local taxi drivers resulted
in a 52% increase in their reporting concerns about children who may have
been at risk of child sexual exploitation. This enabled prompt action to be
taken by the police to safeguard children. The board has also developed
constructive links to promote positive engagement with the local faith and
community groups. This includes raising awareness of child sexual exploitation
to the local mosques and churches.


Board members are influential in driving improvement in their own
organisations and in maintaining a focus on key safeguarding issues. The
board has recently streamlined the multi-agency threshold guidance to
improve partner responses to safeguard children. Members are confident that
the thresholds are well understood across their agencies through the use of
audits, sampling and monitoring of performance data to provide assurance.


The board is highly responsive to current issues. When a virtual reality game
for children resulted in children putting themselves at risk on the local cliffs in
search of some of the virtual characters, the swift multi-agency response


initiated by the board manager resulted in the games designers removing the
characters from cliff edge locations.

The effectiveness of the board, and the strength and commitment of
partnership working are demonstrated through the robust challenge and focus
on children seen in the comprehensive audit programme. The audit
programme is developed by the learning and improvement sub-group, which
is responsive to the key safeguarding issues for the local authority and its
partners. Partners contribute consistently to the audit programme, which
includes multi-agency, single-agency and section 11 audits. This provides a
rich source of information, which, combined with information from other
sources including serious case reviews, child deaths, childrens views and
external inspections, provides a comprehensive overview of the state of
safeguarding practice within South Tyneside. This enables the board to focus
its priorities and training agenda.


The comprehensive training offer from the board is developed through
consultation and analysis. Training is evaluated to ensure that it is raising
awareness and improving practice. The training offer is well aligned to the
strategic priorities of partnerships to improve working practice in safeguarding
children and improving outcomes. A strength of the workforce development
group has been its merger with the training group from the SAB. This
supports coordinated working on the think family approach, especially in
response to children in families in which alcohol, substance misuse, domestic
abuse and mental ill health are prevalent.


The voice of children in the work of the board is increasingly influential,
ensuring that important issues for children are highlighted and understood. A
local drama production Is this your story? based on the South Tyneside child
MSET profile, has been performed in a number of schools. This has been very
worthwhile and has resulted in some children seeking support and advice. The
junior LSCB has been proactively involved in anti-bullying campaigns, raising
awareness in schools and presenting awards. The STSCB and the community
safety partnership have worked collaboratively and innovatively with a local
school, South Tyneside Ability Football Club and media students from the
University of Sunderland to develop an online training programme promoting
online safety for vulnerable young people and young adults at risk.


There have been improvements in the quality and analysis of performance
data provided to the board since the JTAI in 2016. The board knows that
there are still areas for development in the quality of information and analysis
to enhance members understanding and help them to challenge more
robustly. For example, data on return home interviews is currently reported as
those offered, not those undertaken. Consequently, the board was not aware
of the true picture in respect of the number of interviews undertaken. In
addition, the performance data for early help services is underdeveloped and
does not provide the board with the detailed information it needs to


understand and challenge the effectiveness of multi-agency working.
(Recommendation)

Despite the commitment seen to safeguarding children, the board has not
prioritised or considered the challenges for children looked after living out of
area, and there is no evidence of partnership challenge on the quality of
services and support that these very vulnerable children receive. This is a
significant oversight. (Recommendation)


When there are childrens cases that meet the criteria for a serious case
review or in instances in which learning can be taken forward from significant
incidents, the board responds appropriately. The processes for serious case
reviews ensure that practitioners are fully involved in the process to take
forward learning and improve practice. In addition, the learning is used to
inform strategies and guidance, for example in ensuring that inter-familial
child sexual abuse is included in training on neglect.


The STSCB has developed detailed policies and procedures in respect of
female genital mutilation and has delivered training to raise awareness across
the partnerships, particularly for police and schools. The policy and procedures
appropriately link to policies relating to domestic violence and forced
marriage.


A proactive approach to the Prevent duty in collaboration with the community
safety partnership has resulted in valuable work with frontline professionals
and schools in relation to the Prevent duty. The Workshop to Raise
Awareness of Prevent training has been delivered to 2,400 professionals. In
addition, wider links have been established to raise awareness in local faith
groups, the voluntary sector and colleges. In partnership with the STSCB and
local authority, a Prevent duty information leaflet for parents and carers has
been distributed to schools. Awareness training on trafficking and modern-day
slavery has also been delivered to partners, importantly to the local business
community.


The child death review sub-group, reporting to the regional South of Tyne
child death overview panel, which comprises three local authority areas,
ensures that procedures are implemented appropriately following the death of
any child in South Tyneside. The panel has identified some important areas of
learning, most notably the identification of modifiable factors when reviewing
local deaths and wider learning from serious incidents. The group has
successfully promoted smoking cessation in pregnancy, resulting in the
reduction in women smoking in pregnancy from 25% to 21% over the last 12
months. The group was instrumental in the local implementation of the Give
me Room to Breathe Campaign in respect of safe sleeping.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors from Ofsted and
two Ofsted inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Rachel Holden
Deputy lead inspector: Lisa Summers
Team inspectors: Jan Edwards, Pauline Higham, Pamela Blackman, Fiona Millns,
Lynn Radley and Stella Elliott
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Sarah Urding


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.gov.uk/ofsted
 Crown copyright 2017


