Staffordshire County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and protection, children
looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children board 1
Inspection date: 14 January 2014  5 February 2014
The overall judgement is good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.

Good


Good


Good


Good


Good

The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is good
The LSCB coordinates the activity of statutory partners and has mechanisms in place
to monitor the effectiveness of local arrangements.


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Contents

Section 1: the local authority


Summary of key findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


Information about this inspection


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority


What the inspection judgements mean: the local authority


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children Board


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB



Section 1: the local authority
Summary of key findings
This local authority is good because

When professionals need advice about how to help children and young people
they know how to make a referral and who to contact in Staffordshires First
Response Team (FRT) and Multi-Agency Safeguarding Hub (MASH).
Professionals receive a timely and prompt response to referrals, and the
consent of families is obtained when necessary.


There is a wide range of early help services available to children and families,
provided within local communities in Staffordshire through childrens centres
and Local Support Teams (LST). Professionals work and communicate well
together to support children and their families so that they receive the right
level of service and support to help them.


Children experience few changes of social workers, so they build trusting and
positive relationships with professionals they know and who get to know them.
When inspectors spoke to social workers, they had a good understanding of the
children they work with and appreciated the importance of listening to
childrens experiences and views when making decisions that affect their lives.


When children need help and protection, professionals take the right action.
Managers record the reason for the decisions taken and this is shared with
professionals and families, who understand why professionals are involved and
know how to complain if they are not happy.


Services to children are based on an assessment of their needs, including their
need to be kept safe. The quality of analysis in assessments is good and results
in plans for children that are clear and realistic and set out the support available
for families to help them to make improvements.


When there is a change in childrens circumstances, or plans for children are
not being achieved as agreed, changes to the plans are made so that children
continue to receive the right help and are protected.


The children in care council is an active group of children and young people
who meet regularly and share with senior officers their experiences of what it
means to be a looked after child or care leaver in Staffordshire.


Senior managers and members in Staffordshire meet regularly with looked after
children and care leavers, listen to their views and involve them in discussions,
so that services they receive are right and meet their needs.


Senior officers and members have increased funding for services to children so
that social workers have the right support to help and protect children and
support families.


that assessments and planning for children are timely and, as a result, delay is
avoided and children are kept safe.
members the local authority works very hard to keep brothers and sisters
together.
children so that they can build trusting relationships with adults who care for
them. This means children can settle in their community, make friends and
achieve their aspirations.
ahead, so that children who may need assistance from adult services in the
future have plans in place to support this transition.
independent when they are ready. Care leavers told inspectors that they have
safe accommodation and have real choices about where they live.
practice expected are achieved and maintained. Workers told inspectors that
the training and development opportunities in Staffordshire are good, and
provide learning which helps them work with children and keep them safe.
which have significantly improved services for children in Staffordshire. They
want to continue to learn and to do things better for children and families in
Staffordshire, and welcome external examination and challenge to support
them in this.


What does the local authority need to improve?
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
robust challenge to care planning and see children outside their statutory
review in line with statutory guidance.
of all children with a disability to ensure that workers are fully equipped with
the right skills to communicate effectively with children.
gathered from return home interviews.
supports reflective practice.
adoption plans.
effectively address issues that relate to childrens ethnicity and cultural identity.
employment or training.
shape provision wherever they might live in Staffordshire.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of nine of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Mary Candlin
Team inspectors: Brenda Mclaughlin, Tracey Metcalfe, Peter McEntee, Judith Nelson
Robert Pyner, Christine Williams, Susan Myers, Dominic Porter- Moore


Information about this local authority area2
Children living in this area
 Approximately 171,000 children and young people under the age of 18
years live in Staffordshire. This is 20% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 13% (the national average is 18%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%)
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of
all children living in the area, compared with 16% in the country as a
whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the
area are Asian British 4% and mixed 3%.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 5% (the national average is 18%).
 in secondary schools is 3% (the national average is 14%).
Child protection in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 4,903 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a
reduction from 6,224 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March 2013, 535 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is an increase from 411 at 31 March 2012.
 At 31 March, 2013, 13 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from 15 at 31 March 2012.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31 March 2013, 955 children are being looked after by the LA (a rate of
children) at 31 March 2012.
 Of the 835 children living in provision inspected by Ofsted, 202 (or
authority area


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
area
The data below refer to the performance as of 31 March 2013:
responsibility
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 45 adoptions
to be looked after
subsequently returned to be looked after
moved on to independent living
houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. All were judged to be
good or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of Staffordshires safeguarding arrangements for
the protection of children was in November 2012. The local authority was
judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Staffordshires services for looked after children
was in July 2009. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of Staffordshires fostering services was in January
outstanding.
 The previous inspection of Staffordshires adoption services was in January
Other information about this area
 The Director of People and Deputy Chief Executive is responsible for both
adult and childrens social care and has been in post since November 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for fewer than 295 days.


The interim head of Families First, which includes all the childrens services
functions, has been in post since January 2013.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2012.


In 2009, Staffordshire County Council established a social work practice
provider (as part of a national pilot project). Currently 154 looked after
children and care leavers aged 13 to 25 receive their social work support
from this independent social work practice (SWP), of whom 72 are looked
after children and 82 are care leavers.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
The experiences and progress of children who need help and protection
are good
services in the community, which prevent problems escalating. This is reflected
in the significant decrease in children requiring specialist social care services.
Staffordshires Thresholds Framework provides parents with information on how
to access help and provides comprehensive guidance to professionals.
early help and front door services. Childrens centre services and Local Support
Teams (LSTs) have been brought together to give children and their families
access to good quality multi-disciplinary support, ranging from low-level advice
to wrap-around services to address childrens more complex needs. This
investment in early help has enabled more children to be helped without the
need for support from statutory support services. When a coordinated multiagency approach is needed, an early help assessment is undertaken using the
Common Assessment Framework (CAF). While this provides for timely
intervention from the Local Support Teams, use of the CAF by partner agencies
is under developed and this leads to an over reliance on local authority based
services.
in need of help and protection, particularly through the Multi Agency
Safeguarding Hub (MASH). This forms part of Staffordshires First Response
Team (FRT), which provides a single point of entry to childrens social care and
delivers a prompt offer of help or assessment. Referrals are screened by
qualified social workers in the FRT. Parental consent is obtained where
necessary. Partners told inspectors that they value the FRT, which provides
signposting to relevant services and guidance on how to refer a child for more
specialised support. The co-location of the Emergency Duty Team within FRT
provides for a seamless transition between day-time and out-of-hours services,
and facilitates effective information sharing.
facilitates a flexible but robust approach to identifying childrens needs and has
contributed to the timeliness of assessments and to families not having to
repeat their information. The vast majority of assessments demonstrate good
analysis of childrens needs and circumstances, which supports sound decision
making and planning. Chronologies are used routinely and most are of good
quality, detailing significant events in the childs life and helping to tell the
childs story. Childrens needs arising from their ethnicity and culture were well
addressed in some, but not in most, assessments.
Social workers form positive, professional relationships with the children and


their families. Social workers spoken to were able to articulate the importance
of understanding the childs experiences and views. Most case files showed
purposeful and sensitive direct work with children, and there were strong
examples of recording which told the childs story very well.
services to a team around the child (TAC), which ensures families are able to
maintain improvements with less intensive support. In cases involving risk of
significant harm, Local Support Teams refer promptly to Specialist Safeguarding
Units (SSUs), where swift action is taken to protect children.
qualified social workers. The police provide written information, but do not
attend all strategy meetings. Local authority staff work diligently to compensate
for this shortfall, and decision making is sound as a result. Investigations
involving children with a disability are always co-worked with a specialist social
worker from the disabled childrens team ensuring childrens individuality and
needs arising from their disability are fully understood.
are strong. Agencies work hard together to address domestic abuse and, where
this is happening, children are visited promptly and are offered good quality
help and support, which reduces risk for the children and adults involved. Adult
mental health and substance misuse professionals are key partners, and their
contributions to risk assessments are well evidenced in case files.
routinely analyse risk and identify protective factors, and partners contribute
effectively to the sharing of information at conferences. This enables sound
decision making and planning. The number of children with multi-agency child
protection plans has increased over the last eighteen months and the rate is
now similar to that of statistical neighbours. There has been a significant
improvement in the voice of the child being heard at child protection
conferences. Inspectors viewed some good examples of reports, of the recently
internally developed and externally commissioned tools, such as My journey,
My voice and View Point had been well used to help children and young
people make their views known. However, very few young people attend child
protection conferences, which can mean opportunities are missed for their voice
to be heard directly.
are also supported to participate, with their views recorded in minutes. Core
group activity is effective in monitoring and progressing child protection plans.
Most parents spoken to by inspectors understand the reason for the local
authority intervention in their lives. Statutory visits are regular, with children
seen and seen alone where necessary. Records of visits are detailed and often
of good quality, although some would benefit from a clearer focus on
monitoring the objectives of the child protection plan.


Inspectors found good examples of childrens wishes and feelings being sought,
and timely reviews being held which support effective intervention.
when concerns escalate or when progress is not being made in childrens
timescales. All files contain evidence of purposeful management oversight, and
where outcomes for children are not improving there is good use of legal
gateway meetings, chaired by senior managers, to progress cases through legal
proceedings. Senior managers challenge plans when necessary and this helps
ensure that permanence is considered at the earliest opportunity. The local
authority effectively uses the Public Law Outline (PLO), and there is good
evidence that when cases do progress to court they do so at the right time for
the child.
sharing is very effective. This underpins the work of the Multi-Agency Risk
Assessment Conference (MARAC) and helps to identify and reduce the risks that
domestic abuse presents to children. Children and their families have access to
a wide range of services and this enables victims and their children to receive
offers of individual packages of protection and support.
are missing from home, a local authority care placement or full time education.
of tracing children over the last 3 years is almost 100%. Of the 61 children not
in full time education at the time of the inspection, all are monitored and
offered suitable education and vocational options.
gathered and shared effectively amongst agency partners, and with other local
authorities who place looked after children in Staffordshire. When children are
identified to be at risk they are well protected through robust child protection
arrangements and support.
robust assessment is completed and looks at the reasons for the missing
episode to help identify the young persons support needs. Good examples
were seen by inspectors of positive impact, where risk has been significantly
reduced and incidents of young people being missing have ceased. However,
data and intelligence regarding missing episodes is only recorded manually and
this constrains the local authoritys ability to aggregate and analyse this data.
The arrangements with other local authorities who place children in
Staffordshire are good and mean that children placed in Staffordshire who go
missing receive the same level of response as Staffordshire children, which is
good practice.


responding to allegations of abuse is effective. The co-location of the LADO at
the MASH has resulted in better levels of communication with other agencies,
and there is evidence of an increase in referrals as a result of the LADO being
more visible to partners.
arrangements are good. There is a well-developed strategy to raise awareness
across agencies and the wider community. Practice is sensitive to childrens and
families individual characteristics and differences. Awareness of childrens
isolation and the impact of separation from parents, and the effect of cultural
and language difference, is well-evidenced in case files.
The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence are good
made on a timely basis and are supported by good multi-agency assessments
of their needs.
an additional level of scrutiny, so that where possible children are supported to
remain with their family and in their local community. The work of the panel is
underpinned by an edge of care intensive prevention service, which means
that only those children who should enter care do so.
for possible legal intervention are robust. The panel routinely explores a range
of options in meeting the individual needs of children and young people,
including concurrent planning. Application of these processes together with very
positive working relationships with CAFCASS and the Judiciary, and robust
implementation of the Public Law Outline process, means that the length of
care proceedings in Staffordshire has reduced significantly and performance in
this area is now good. This has resulted in reduced delay in planning for
children and in securing their future.
examples seen where young people had lived in the same placement for several
years, allowing them to make significant attachments to those who care for
them; this helps them to realise their aspirations. Most are helped to have a
good understanding of their family history and background and to understand
the reasons why they are looked after. Staffordshires commitment to continuity
of care is also demonstrated through the Staying Put policy, which enables
young people reaching the age of 18 to remain with their foster care
placement. The local authority is committed to building on this practice so that
more young people can benefit from the arrangement.


good provision and receiving services that meet their current needs. They are
well supported and benefit from placement stability, with evidence that risks
are being managed and examples seen of missing episodes reduced or stopped
since placement. Where required, young people out of county can access
therapeutic support that meets their assessed needs. Contact with families is
promoted and maintained. Young people have regular social work visits and this
includes seeing them alone. However, some young people report difficulty in
contacting their social worker between visits. Reviews are timely and young
people contribute to their review and know their independent reviewing
officers, who support them well. Providers spoken to by inspectors said that the
local authority is rigorous in ensuring that children are suitably placed and safe
and works collaborately with them to help resolve problems early, avoiding
potential disruption.
considered promptly. This is reflected in the improved adoption performance
and in the increasing use of long-term fostering placements and special
guardianship and residence orders in securing permanence for children. The
local authority fostering service was rated outstanding at its last inspection in
carers and adopters. Retention of foster carers is also good as a result of them
receiving effective support and training. This means children benefit from good
placement choice and quality. The local authority operates five childrens
homes, all of which were judged to be good or outstanding in their most recent
Ofsted inspection. Where appropriate, specialist placements are used and
resourced. The combination of high quality in-house placements, intelligent use
of external placements and robust monitoring processes means that the local
authoritys commissioning arrangements for looked after children are highly
effective.
consideration and promotion of contact with brothers and sisters and family
members where necessary, ensuring bonds are kept and enhanced. Children
understand what their care plan is. When children and young people return
home, there is suitable support to give the best chance of a successful
reunification.
Staffordshire children, which itself is better than average performance
nationally. Most looked after young people attend good schools at a level equal
to that of all Staffordshire children, although this remains below the national
average. The small number of looked after children not in school have access to
suitable alternative education, with good support to assist in re-integration into
mainstream schooling. Looked after children in Staffordshire are less likely to be
absent or excluded from school than looked after children nationally.


considerably below statistical neighbour and England averages. Missing from
care processes are robust, with good levels of follow-up by the allocated social
worker.
being undertaken, including to those young people placed outside Staffordshire,
and evidence of children being seen and seen alone. Social workers
demonstrate a good understanding of the childs placement and events in the
young persons life.
assessments of children in care at 86%. This includes young people placed
outside the authority. Young people also benefit from support from the link
child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS) worker based in the
CAMHS teams, the youth emotional support service (YESS) and a mental health
support service (SUSTAIN). However, there are some blocks to the attainment
of all initial health assessments in the required 28 day period. The local
authority has plans in place to improve performance and has recently agreed a
clear pathway with health partners to address this.
placements, with good social work support provided by a specialist children
with disability team. There are good transition arrangements with adult
services, with examples seen of their involvement from the age of 14.
Individual workers have a range of skills in relation to communicating
effectively with children who are non-verbal. However, there is no strategic
approach to ensuring all social workers have the necessary skills to
communicate effectively with all disabled children on their caseloads.
care plans supports good outcomes. Most young people attend their review
meeting or complete a consultation form, which helps capture their experiences
and views, which are then considered as part of the review process. Young
people are represented well by their social worker, which further supports
childrens voices being heard when making decisions that affect their lives.
Advocacy is discussed and actively considered in looked after children reviews.
However, inspectors saw some examples of lack of sufficient challenge by the
independent reviewing officers when care plans had been or needed to be
changed. The recording of some reviews was also unclear, with actions lacking
specific timescales. IRO caseloads are above national guidelines and this affects
reviewing officers ability to meet all young people between childrens reviews.
looked after children, and social workers use the services available as necessary
to support children and young people.


authority with insights into the experiences of what it means to be a looked
after child in Staffordshire. These insights have informed service development
and led to positive changes in services. This includes some innovative work, for
example, the children in care council members have visited young people
placed outside Staffordshire, taking back issues to senior management for
further action. The authority has achieved recognition for this work by recently
winning the Hear by Right gold award for providing vulnerable children with
opportunities to help shape their service. The council is complemented by four
geographically based young peoples forums for looked after children, at which
young people are consulted on a variety of issues.
and identity history, including work around sexual identity and vulnerability.
The local authority rightly sets high standards for this area of work and
recognises the need to further strengthen this practice within assessments and
plans.
under 16 provided with an information pack detailing these, and a similar pack
for 16 plus to be released shortly, with an additional focus on preparation for
independence. Complaint processes are effective in ensuring that young
peoples complaints are heard and dealt with. Young people are made aware of
and reminded about the complaints process in consultation forms for looked
after children reviews. There is an advocacy service in Staffordshire for young
people in care, which is currently working with 36 young people.
work support from an independent social work practice (SWP). These young
people benefit from continuity of social worker from age 13 to leaving care and
beyond. Inspectors found variations in the quality of service provided to these
children and young people, with examples seen of insufficient management
oversight. Overall, the quality of service and outcomes is good and on a par
with that provided by Staffordshire County Council services to looked after
children and care leavers. Safeguarding processes are robust, with effective
arrangements in place to manage child protection concerns. The emergency
duty system within the SWP contributes to supporting placement stability as
workers know the cases, and this supports good communication and
intervention. Feedback to the SWP from foster carers highlighted that they
valued the duty service.

The graded judgment for adoption performance good
where a return to their family would be unsafe or would not satisfactorily meet
their needs. The use of legal gateway meetings means early discussions take


place in all cases about the suitability of adoption and the potential to achieve
it.
proceedings, already better than the national average, is making a positive
difference in reducing the time for most children between when they come into
the care of the local authority and being placed with their adoptive family.
happens more quickly for children in Staffordshire than the national average
and meets the governments threshold on the 2013 Adoption scorecard.
Between April and December 2013, 64 children were placed for adoption and
the best interest decision. At the time of inspection, 105 children were waiting
to be adopted in Staffordshire.
number of children being adopted. Between March 2013 and December 2013,
year. Family finding is rigorous and proactive and includes the effective use of
adoption activity days.
came into care more recently, but for a small number of harder to place
children (such as older children, brothers and sisters, and children with a
disability) the authority has struggled to identify appropriate adoption
placements. As a result, a few children have been waiting too long without a
permanent home being found for them. The authority has identified this
shortfall, and following review has put appropriate plans in place for all these
children, including converting some long-term foster placements into adoptive
placements. They have also recognised through this process the need to
strengthen their tracking and review processes.
recruitment campaign for more adopters. This has resulted in a significant
increase in enquiries and led to more applications and approvals. For example,
the number of approved adopters has increased by 55, with a further 17
adopters progressing towards completion of their assessments. This improves
the number and choice of adopters within the county and has enabled more
children to be placed with adopters.
process for adopters in place, and the authority is doing well on completing
both stages of the approval process within the governments timescale.
Adoptive applicants can access preparation groups and move on to their
assessment promptly.


being presented to the adoption panel facilitates the efficient running of the
panel and reduces delay in considering applications. The quality of assessments
and matching documentation presented to the panel is good. The chair and
panel members provide robust scrutiny and challenge, and feedback is used to
improve practice. The recommendations from the panel on approvals and
matches are thoroughly and robustly considered by the agency decision maker,
who is a suitably senior officer.
cannot be identified quickly, the adoption service takes prompt steps to refer
their information to the national adoption register and regional consortium.
Inspectors saw good evidence of persistent and diligent family finding activity,
particularly for brothers and sisters and children with complex health needs or
disabilities. The adoption service demonstrates a committed, robust and
creative approach to this aspect of their work. This has resulted in some
notable success in placing hard to place children, but remains a key priority for
the local authority.
foster carers and adoptive parents. The adoption social workers work effectively
with the childrens social workers and this means support to families is well
coordinated.
stability. It is based on a thorough assessment of need and is available to all
adoptive families after an adoption order is made. As a minimum this includes
the adoption passport, regular newsletters from the adoption service, continued
access to local adopters support groups and training opportunities.
Staffordshire adoption processes, including post adoption support, and valued
the help and support they had received. A good range of help and advice is
available to adopted children, including direct work such as Therapy and
SUSTAIN, a specialist CAMHS team who undertake psychological assessments
and direct work with children.
after adoption, which includes a Post Box service enabling and coordinating
indirect contact and supporting direct contact between adopted children and
their families, brothers and sisters and other birth family members.
The graded judgment for the experiences and progress of care leavers is
good
throughout their teenage years, including leaving care. This facilitates strong
continuity and support for young people at times of transition in their lives


through the development of effective relationships with social workers and
personal advisers. As a result, most care leavers are helped to develop into
independent and resilient young people.
following consultation with care leavers and is focused on practical guidance;
for example, including the contact numbers and names for relevant services.
Care leavers felt plans were an improvement on the previous document and
effectively helped them to review choices and opportunities in their lives.
strengths and areas for further development in order to improve effectiveness.
The most recent audit shows that the majority of pathway plans fully met the
success criteria set by managers. It also identified as an area for development
that some pathway plans lacked clear consideration of emotional well-being and
mental health support. Arrangements are in place to improve practice in this
regard.
where they live, which include supported accommodation and the independent
rented sector. The local authority has a focus on developing provision for the
Staying Put scheme as a choice for young people and currently there are 24
care leavers accommodated under the project.
of care leavers aged 19 who are in accommodation that meets their needs
shows that the Staffordshire has achieved good outcomes which are above
statistical neighbours and national figures.
services. However, current care leavers do not have consistent access to their
health records. This has been recognised by the local authority and a group of
young people has worked with staff to develop a comprehensive health record
known as the Red Book. This was launched in the autumn of 2013 for new
care leavers.
employment or training has been below that found in statistical neighbours and
nationally. The latest comparative data shows that there has been a strong
improvement within the local authority, with outcomes now in line with
statistical neighbours, although remaining below the national figure. Local
authority data show that the figure for 20132014 shows further improvement.
schemes. For example, the Foundation to Employment scheme has supported
around 160 young people over the last four years. The project involves the
development of personal skills in readiness for employment and work
placements. Altogether there are about 90 employers enrolled in the project. A


significant number of young people have secured full-time employment at the
end of these placements.
district council and a large private sector construction company. In September
unaccompanied asylum seeking young people are in education, employment or
training.
for higher education. The UNIFY (university for you) project has seen the
number of care leavers in higher education rise from seven in 2012 to eighteen
last year. The project is coordinated by the virtual school, within which there is
a further focus on raising the aspirations of younger looked after children who
may potentially benefit from higher education.
and this was confirmed by young people spoken to. The care leavers group 
the 4US Forum  located in the Stafford area, is an effective and lively
reference group which has supported and developed changes to the provision
for young people across a range of issues, including information and guidance,
health records and accommodation provision. The group has worked on a
published care leavers charter which incorporates their rights and entitlements,
including access to the leaving care bursary. However, although it is a countywide group, it is based in Stafford and this potentially restricts opportunities for
young people who live in other parts of this large county to participate fully in
its activities.


Leadership, management and governance are good
improvement over several years from a historic position of poor to adequate
practice to one where all services are now judged to be good or better.
Investment in early help has led to a reduction in children requiring statutory
social work support, and statutory services have also become more effective in
helping Staffordshires most vulnerable children. Senior managers and elected
members have effectively led this improvement and ensured that areas for
development in previous inspections are addressed. They are visible and have a
good understanding of the needs of children and young people.
Director of Adult Social Services (DASS) were subject to an independent test of
assurance, to ensure roles and responsibilities are discharged effectively and
the final report was issued in January 2014. The local authority recently made
the decision that the roles of the Lead Member of Childrens Services and Lead
Member of Adult Services would be separated and are now no longer
combined. The Chief Executive effectively holds officers to account and takes
an active role in understanding childrens experiences, particularly those of care
leavers, and uses this to improve services. The Director of Childrens Services
demonstrates strong leadership, commitment and vision and is supported by an
effective management group.
strengths and areas for development and reflects inspection findings. The
authority is open to external scrutiny and uses learning well, including learning
from inspection, to reflect and drive improvement.
partnerships and this provides for a co-ordinated approach, the robust
monitoring of progress of key priorities and the efficient utilisation of resources.
A key strength of the authority and its partners is the collaborative working
relationships, which support good communication across all levels of the
workforce and promote effective work with families.
Independent Chair of the Local Safeguarding Board (LSCB) and the Childrens
Strategic Partnership is effective in safeguarding children and young people. In
an environment where overall resources available to councils are reducing,
services to vulnerable children are prioritised and resourced. This has resulted
in improved performance in key areas of practice, such as timeliness of
assessments and improving numbers of children being adopted.
first response service supports good communication across the partnership, and
this is a strength. There are clearly understood pathways from universal to
specialist services and overall there is evidence of good joint working across


agencies. The exception to this is progress in ensuring effective use of the
common assessment framework (CAF), where usage by partner agencies
remains low, leading to an over-reliance on referral to local support teams
whose workload is now close to or exceeding capacity. The authority recognises
this and is refreshing its approach to promoting effective CAF usage by partner
agencies.
officers and members demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the needs
of looked after children and care leavers. The corporate parenting panel listens
actively to the voice of young people in care. For example the Childrens Voice
Project has directly influenced the staying put policy and has trained foster
carers to increase their understanding of the needs of looked after children. A
recent review of the corporate parenting panel has strengthened the scrutiny
role, and is now ensuring a greater focus on outcomes. The Lead Member and
recently appointed Chair of the corporate parenting panel is enthusiastic, visible
and highly committed to driving up standards. He meets regularly with young
people and actively involves them in the work of the panel. This includes
children influencing the corporate parenting agenda by their attendance and
chairing of meetings.
to inform the delivery of services across areas, and involves communities in
agreeing priorities and meeting need. Staffordshires approach to
commissioning is based on a thorough analysis of need, and resources are
shared across the partnership at county and local level. Commissioning
objectives are clearly understood across the partnership and this results in
services being targeted and resourced effectively, avoids duplication, and
results in children and families getting the right help at the right time. The
involvement of the voluntary sector also enhances local support to vulnerable
families. This helps to address problems at an early stage and reduces the risk
of issues escalating and requiring statutory intervention.
Senior and middle managers routinely use the local authoritys service
performance and quality assurance framework across a range of meetings to
monitor performance and the impact of services at operational level. For
example, the performance assessment and review meetings provide analysis
and monitoring of progress against agreed priorities, and act as an alert to gaps
or dips in performance which are then analysed and addressed. Management
oversight of practice is evident in nearly all cases and includes scrutiny of case
work by operational and strategic leads, who also chair legal and
accommodation panels.
permanent workforce; agency workers are mainly used to cover planned
temporary absence. The authoritys retention rate for newly qualified social
workers (NQSWs) is 93%, which is notable. In addition, all staff spoken to by


inspectors spoke very positively of the training and development opportunities.
They consider Staffordshire is a good place to work and value the support
provided by their managers, including senior managers.
resources to front line services and has reduced overall caseloads in line with
the authoritys targets. However, the benefit of increased resources has been
reduced in some teams because of increased demands on front line services.
This has stretched capacity in some services and resulted in some workers
carrying high caseloads and working excessive hours in order to continue to
provide a good service to children. Senior managers have a good understanding
of workforce pressures and expressed a firm commitment to increase capacity
should current levels of demand be sustained.
overall. Managers understand the principles of reflective supervision but
struggle to deliver this because of workload pressures. The authority has a
detailed understanding of its workforce profile and their training needs and
works closely with the LSCB to deliver a comprehensive training programme.
Inspectors saw good evidence of practitioners applying their learning in their
risk analysis when completing assessments and in direct work with children.
Newly Qualified Social Worker (NQSW) and other post-qualifying training is
effective.

There are effective strategic links between Staffordshires children services,
Cafcass, the courts and the family justice board. Compliance with public law
outline processes means that, in the majority of cases, assessments (including
expert assessments) are completed prior to the application to the court, and
this reduces the need for lengthy proceedings and has improved timescales in
permanency planning for children.

compliance arrangements are rigorous and effective. The relationship between
the SWP and the authority provides for collaborative working across services
and means that looked after children and care leavers needs within the SWP
remain a priority. However, the authority has identified capacity issues in the
SWP provision, in particular around the supervisory arrangements of workers.
The authority has provided additional support to the SWP to help address this
shortfall and continues to actively monitor performance in this area.


What the inspection judgements mean: the local
authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.


Section 2: The effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board
The effectiveness of the LSCB is good
Priority and immediate action
Areas for improvement
child protection conferences to ensure effective partnership working in these
areas.
hold all partner agencies to account in supporting delivery of this component of
the early help offer.
Key strengths and weaknesses of the LSCB
are strong, effective and compliant with statutory responsibilities. The Board is
well-constituted, with members at the correct level of seniority to enable SSCB
to drive forward the comprehensive safeguarding agenda and key priorities
detailed in the Annual Report and Business Plan.
commands respect. Through the Chair, the Board has representation on other
strategic boards including the Health and Wellbeing Board and Childrens
Strategic Partnership. There are also effective links with Stokes LSCB and with
the Adult Safeguarding Board.
Commissioning Group, ensuring that childrens safeguarding is a priority. The
Chief Executive shows ownership of the SSCB and a commitment to driving
forward key priorities, and has a good understanding of issues relating to the
work of the Board and the protection of children across Staffordshire. The
Board is well supported by its business manager, development officer and
training coordinators. The comprehensive Annual Report provides a detailed
account of the Boards activity during 201213, and updates on the positive
progress that has been made. It is forward looking, identifying refreshed and
new priorities for 201314. Evidence of progress against priorities was found at
both strategic and operational levels during the inspection. Progress is reported
in a user-friendly document available for all workers, and those who spoke to
inspectors were well informed about the work of the SSCB and the difference it
made to their day-to-day work.


auditing activity, which inform practice and developments. Where an agency
requires support this is provided from the SSCB agencies. For example, a joint
S11 tool kit that has been developed with Stoke LSCB and is used to help
agencies complete and monitor progress against standards set by the Board in
respect of the S11 audits. The Board effectively challenges partners, and this
has influenced developing practice such as the safeguarding improvements
made by the Youth Offenders Institution in Staffordshire.
contribution to section 47 enquiries, evidence gathered during the inspection
indicated this had re-emerged as an issue. In response to these concerns the
SSCB, Local Authority and Staffordshire Police have appropriately reviewed and
re-focused their action plan.
involved in discussions at the highest level with the police and an action plan is
in place to address this. Additional police resources have been made available
to meet demand, including the need to prioritise attendance at conferences.
early help, specifically over completion of the common assessment framework
(CAF) documentation by partner agencies. The Board recognises that the pace
of progress has been limited and work has commenced to address this: a new
CAF is being developed, but this remains a key area for the Board to monitor
and challenge.
instrumental in making a difference to children and delivering against agreed
priorities. Practice to support children at risk of child sexual exploitation is good.
Information is published for professionals, and also for children, to raise
awareness and provide guidance on keeping safe. This has been informed by
the views of children and young people, including the powerful messages
presented to a SSCB conference from a young person who had been subject to
sexual exploitation. There is evidence of positive impact for children as a result
of this work, for example an increase in referrals in relation to CSE.
support and challenge in monitoring some key service improvements. These
include responses to children missing from care, development of the MASH and
a revised domestic abuse policy and procedure.
are in place and regularly reviewed. These include clear and well-used guidance
on thresholds which has been developed and produced with involvement of
partners and informed by findings from case reviews and training.


Voice tool kit in response to identifying that the views of children were not
visible in plans. The tool kit has now been rolled out, and there has been a
protection plans.
the partnership, with a pool of staff able to deliver against the agreed
comprehensive training strategy. There are many examples of the training
being informed by the voice of the child, staff evaluations, analysis of data and
findings from case reviews and file audits. Training is well attended and is also
a source of income, which is re-invested to support the work of the Board.
and monitoring is undertaken by a sub-group, with exception reports and a
user-friendly dash board presented to the Board. Audits and case reviews,
including serious case reviews (SCRs), are undertaken in line with statutory
guidance and inform service improvement. In the past twelve months there has
been one serious incident notification to Ofsted, in October 2013, and the
Board has agreed that the case will be reviewed using a root cause analysis
framework to inform learning. The SCR sub-group monitors the findings and
progress against action plans. Many examples are evident of the impact of case
reviews having shaped and informed practice developments, training and
procedures.


What the inspection judgments mean: the LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted', which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, workbased
learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2014


