Stockport Metropolitan Borough
Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection dates: 12 June to 6 July 2017
Report published: 25 August 2017

Childrens services in Stockport are good

Good

permanence

Good


Outstanding


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Since the last Ofsted inspection in 2012, services for children have improved at every
stage of the childs journey. Good social work practice is now in place across all
childrens services in Stockport, with some examples of outstanding practice, in
particular for those children who need adoption and permanency.
Strategic plans are well aligned and appropriately prioritise vulnerable children. Clear
governance arrangements between strategic boards avoid duplication and
fragmentation. Service delivery is enhanced by active engagement of partner
agencies within a culture of constructive support and challenge. Good commissioning
arrangements and workforce development programmes mean that many children
and families benefit from effective services.
The director of childrens services and the senior leadership team ensure that
practice development is informed by research, feedback from children and best
practice elsewhere. While the quality of performance management data and auditing
activity is variable, senior leaders have a clear understanding of what is happening
on the frontline and act quickly when improvement is needed.
Planning to increase capacity has not kept up with demand, leading to social worker
and independent reviewing officer (IRO) caseloads being too high. This has an
impact on the quality of managerial supervision, which, while regular, does not
always evidence sufficient reflection or challenge, and on the recording of decisionmaking. While the local authority has made improvements in the quality of practice,
some of these improvements, such as in the responses to children who go missing
from home or care, are very recent and not yet embedded.
Social work practice is consistently strong. Workers know children well, and effective
partnership working and a wide range of services, including an extensive range of
early-help support, are available to help and protect children. Significant harm is well
identified and responded to promptly. However, triage activity at the Multi-Agency
Safeguarding and Support Hub (MASSH) is not always timely when contacts are
assessed as non-urgent. The quality of assessments is generally good and childrens
needs are well understood. However, not all of the written plans are specific in
identifying key responsible individuals and timescales. The ASPIRE team ensures that
children who have complex safeguarding needs, including those at risk of child
sexual exploitation, are well managed.
Arrangements for children who have specific additional needs, including those who
are at risk of radicalisation and those who are privately fostered, ensure that children
are safe. Speedy assessments of young people aged 16 and 17 presenting as
homeless lead to timely offers of appropriate accommodation. Some agencies have
not promptly notified, or supplied further information to, the designated officer,
delaying joint working.
Children come into care appropriately, informed by good collaborative assessments.
Effective edge-of-care services help children at risk of family breakdown to remain at
home or to be successfully rehabilitated home from care. Children are seen regularly,
and seen alone, by social workers they trust, who progress comprehensive plans to


secure their permanence. Children live in homes with dedicated carers who are
supported well. Contact arrangements are effective. A small number of children are
placed in out-of-borough residential homes. Children in and out of area are
supported well to improve or maintain their physical and emotional health and wellbeing. Most children make good educational progress. Although there is a good
childrens participation team, further work is needed to develop an independent
visitor and advocacy service.
Adoption services are outstanding. Comprehensive processes and skilled social work
ensure the early identification and robust monitoring of children for whom adoption
may become the plan. Family-finding strategies are creative, well recorded and
highly effective in identifying families in a timely way. The search begins early and
systematically, and quickly widens. Family finders routinely explore the use of all the
potential national options. Profiling and matching is highly developed and shortlisting
of families to link with children is sophisticated. Highly effective support is offered for
children and adopters, which starts early and develops seamlessly as the adoption
process moves forward. This support is high-quality, expert and responsive and is
strengthened by a range of tailored training and support. As a result, some children
are matched within a matter of days. The local authority is very successful in finding
adopters within childrens timescales, for children whose needs, experiences and
backgrounds can be complex and challenging.
The local authority is a committed corporate parent, ensuring that the support it
gives to care leavers continues well into adulthood. Most young people leaving care
receive very well-coordinated support and help that assists them in making a
successful transition to adulthood. Plans for them are effective and address their
individual needs. Care leavers have support to ensure that their health needs are
met, and are helped to access adult services. They are safe and feel safe, particularly
where they live. The majority are supported to secure and maintain suitable and safe
housing, with a minority living in temporary housing, rather than good-quality
supported accommodation. Although increasing numbers of care leavers successfully
access education, employment and training, too many do not sustain this
engagement and too few enter higher education or apprenticeships. An example of
outstanding practice is the commitment to ensure that contact with care leavers is
maintained well into their twenties and beyond.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home. It was judged to be good in
their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in February 2012. The local
authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in February 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since April 2004.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services.
 A new chief executive has been appointed and will come into post in September
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since July 2016.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 61,507 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Stockport. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 16% of the local authoritys children aged under 16 years are
living in low-income families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 13% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 13% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 20%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 in secondary schools is 7% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 21 June 2017, 2001 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 1,974
at 31 March 2016.
 At 21 June 2017, 275 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan (a rate of 45 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 190
(31 per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2016.
 At 21 June 2017, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
This is the same figure as that at 31 March 2016.
 In the two years before inspection, five serious incident notifications have been
submitted to Ofsted and two serious case reviews have been completed.
 There were five serious case reviews ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 21 June 2017, 347 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 56 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 295 (47 per 10,000 children)
at 31 March 2016.
Of this number:
authority area
 No children live in residential special schools3.
area
 six children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 21 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


 There are no children and young people living in houses of multiple
occupation who have ceased to be looked after.

Recommendations

Ensure that social worker, and IRO, caseloads are at a reasonable level to
support good-quality work.


Ensure that frontline managers have the capacity to provide staff with reflective
supervision, including challenge when necessary, and that the rationale for
decision-making and case progression is clearly recorded.


Ensure that all plans for children are clear and reflect the childs timescales for
change.


Ensure that the designated officer function is understood and embedded across
the partnership, so that all allegations against professionals are responded to
promptly.


Improve the timeliness of triage arrangements, for non-urgent referrals, in the
MASSH.


Ensure that all children looked after have access to advocacy and independent
visitors.


Ensure that all care leavers have access to high-quality supported housing that
enables them to develop skills to move into adult life effectively.


Further develop the support for care leavers who are not in employment
education and training, including an extension of the councils apprenticeship
scheme.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and young people in Stockport are good. This is because the
council listens to your views and involves you in developing services especially for
those who are being looked after. Everyone is working together to make things
better for you.
 When you need extra help, particularly if you do not feel safe, everyone works
closely together to make sure that you and your family receive the right sort of
help quickly. This means that social workers, police and teachers work well
together to make sure that you are safe and well protected. It also means that
families get help before problems are too big. However, sometimes things do not
happen as quickly as they should  for example, finding out why someone might
have run away from home.
 When you have to leave your family, social workers are good at making sure that
most of you live in stable, caring foster families and in good childrens homes. A
few children find that they have to change families too often, but social workers
work hard to avoid this. Managers are very good at making sure that you can live
locally, near to your school and friends. When it is safe for you to return home,
you and your families are helped to do so with lots of support to make it work.
 If you are being looked after by the local authority, you have plenty of help to
make sure that you stay healthy, go to the doctor and dentist regularly, and do
your best at school. If problems arise, then plans are made, which are reviewed
regularly so you can continue to make good progress. Although social workers
listen to what you want to happen, you do not always have someone, who is not
involved in your care, who can help you to say what you think.
 Those of you who need to live permanently with another family receive excellent
and prompt support. This can include those of you who need to be adopted and
those who want to remain with their carers past the age of 18.
 Most of you leaving care get the help you need to become successful adults.
Social workers and personal advisers develop excellent relationships with you.
They work extremely hard to make sure that most of you feel safe and have a
pathway plan that is right for you. You told us that, while you understand the
recent changes in the range of available support accommodation, it needs to be
better. More of you are now attending further education and getting a job, but
there are still too many who are not working, going to college or getting an
apprenticeship. Personal advisers and social workers stay in touch with nearly
everyone and keep in touch for as long as is needed.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Children, young people and their families who need help and protection benefit
from a good range of services, which helps to ensure that children are safe.
An extensive range of early-help services, with effective parenting programmes
and a recently established Team Around the School (TAS) approach, identifies and
responds to the emerging needs of children. Good multi-agency support is offered
to ensure that only those in most need are referred to childrens services.
Thresholds are well understood and applied in the MASSH. Children at risk of
significant harm are well identified and responded to promptly. Informationgathering arrangements lead to timely strategy discussions and immediate
allocation for assessment. In a small number of non-urgent cases, there are delays
in gathering further information or ensuring that the MASSH has consent for work.
Out-of-hours services are of a high quality and include visits as part of child
protection planning arrangements.
Social workers in Stockport form trusted relationships with children and their
families, through good-quality direct work. Childrens views are sought by the
highly regarded childrens participation team and these are integral to the multiagency work undertaken. The quality of assessments is generally good and
childrens needs are well understood. Plans are not always sufficiently detailed and
clear on the childs timescales for change. Well-coordinated core groups and child
protection conferences contribute to the protection of children.
Children who have complex safeguarding needs, including those at risk of child
sexual exploitation, are well managed through the highly-regarded ASPIRE team.
Return home interviews for those children who go missing have not been timely
and a new Missing Hub was being established as this inspection commenced.
Although improvements were seen, the new arrangements are yet to be
embedded.
Arrangements for children who have specific additional needs, including those who
are at risk of radicalisation and those who are privately fostered, promote the
safety of children. Support to 16- and 17-year-old homeless young people is good.
Prompt joint assessments with Stockport Homes ensures young people are offered
appropriate accommodation, including being looked after if additional needs are
identified.
Designated officer (known locally as LADO) capacity has very recently been
increased, and in the main the work undertaken is of good quality. Other agencies
have not always been prompt in notifying the designated officer or supplying
further information.


Inspection findings

Children in Stockport benefit from consistently strong social work practice.
Appropriate support and intervention are provided at important stages in
childrens lives. Social workers know their children and families well. They
coordinate partnership working from the point of contact, through assessments,
child protection conferences and core group meetings, resulting in the
reduction of risk and improving outcomes for children.

analysis of local need, has led to the commissioning and provision of a good
range of universal, targeted and specialist services. These include evidencebased parenting programmes and an infantparent service providing perinatal
support, highly valued by parents. The recent development of a TAS approach
in Stockport is beginning to make a positive difference for children and families.
Commencing at the start of the 2016/17 academic year, all schools now have
an allocated liaison social worker and a school age plus family support worker.
This has resulted in children who have more complex needs being assessed and
supported in school settings. Early adopter schools are ensuring positive
changes for children, with improvements in attendance, reductions in the need
for fixed-term exclusions of up to 60%, and fewer contacts with childrens
services. This good work is underpinned by the adoption of a restorative
practice approach across the whole partnership. This involves taking into
account a familys strengths as well as their vulnerabilities, ensuring that
families understand and take ownership of their role in any decisions that are
made.
challenge or crisis, through the application of this restorative approach across a
range of targeted preventative services provided by the Stockport Families First
Team. The Family Group Conference (FGC) service focuses on identifying
solutions within the wider family at an early stage of intervention, with an
increase in successful outcomes before family situations are beyond repair.
Forty-four of 67 FGCs were completed successfully in the six months prior to
this inspection, enabling children to remain in their families.
vast majority of cases seen by inspectors, thresholds were appropriately applied
on initial screening. Social workers in the first response team carry out prompt
and thorough information-gathering when child protection concerns are
identified. Timely strategy meetings ensure an appropriate response to
concerns. When child protection enquiries are necessary, a social worker in the
relevant locality social work team is immediately allocated so there is no delay
in responding to potential risk to children.
can take some days to complete initial screening. This is frequently due to gaps
in referral information and consent not being gained by partners prior to
contacting the MASSH. In some cases, this delays decision-making about
whether children may require an assessment of their needs. No children were


seen to be at risk from this. An early-help officer (EHO) identifies an
appropriate lead professional when the MASSH identifies that early-help support
would best assist children and families. The EHO provides support and advice to
those professionals undertaking the early-help assessment. (Recommendation)
and concerns outside of normal working hours. The service undertakes planned
visits, including safe and well checks for daytime services, and responds to
new safeguarding concerns, working effectively with other professionals to keep
children safe.
relevant locality social work team. Timeliness is improving and the quality of
social work assessments is generally good. Childrens views and wishes are
gathered well in the majority of cases, through age-appropriate direct work that
informs assessments. Relevant multi-agency information is always sought,
supporting analysis and plans. Management oversight and sign-off are present
at the conclusion of assessments, appropriately informing next actions. In a
small number of cases, issues of diversity could be more clearly identified.
both the child and their siblings. Disability issues are well recognised and the
needs of the other children described well. When safeguarding concerns exist,
appropriate decisions are taken to manage risks under child protection
procedures to ensure that children are kept safe.
Around the Child (TAC) multi-agency meetings. Attendance at the meetings by
families and partners is good. This ensures that children and their families have
support appropriate to meet their need, with effective step-up and step-down
decisions, dependent on achieving identified and agreed change.
appropriate. At the time of the inspection, 270 children were subject of child
protection plans, a 42% increase from the unusually low number of 190 in
March 2016. Decisions to make children subject of a child protection plan are
appropriate. The increase in particular reflects the growing awareness and
response to the effects of domestic abuse on childrens outcomes. The wellregarded childrens participation team visits all children over the age of seven,
and their families, to describe the child protection process. Team members
attend with the child, or represent their views at the conference, and
afterwards explain the plan. This is a good and highly valued service to inform
and support vulnerable children.
core groups, with good levels of multi-agency involvement. These meetings
review and update child protection plans well. The co-location of many multiagency services helps social workers have close working relationships with
relevant professionals, to ensure that support is coordinated and leads to
positive outcomes for children.


planning and coordinated multi-agency work is well focused on managing and
reducing risk. However, not all of the written plans are specific, identifying key
responsible individuals and timescales. (Recommendation)
team provides a specialist response. The team coordinates well-embedded and
effective partnership arrangements. Children at risk from child sexual
exploitation are appropriately identified. The risk to children is minimised by upto-date, thorough risk assessments and comprehensive multi-agency risk
management plans. Appropriate intelligence is also shared across the multiagency group to inform local understanding of high-risk areas to influence
disruption activities. Monthly multi-agency sexual exploitation meetings are
chaired by an IRO to develop action plans for individual children identified as
being at most risk. In all such cases, an ASPIRE social worker is allocated as
either lead or co-worker, helping to ensure that all social workers have a good
understanding of the risks associated with child sexual exploitation. This results
in focused and comprehensive support packages to reduce risk to vulnerable
children.
visited for a return home interview every time they go missing. This primarily
concerns those children who go missing regularly and cases in which there are
safety plans and multi-agency work in place. The local authority identified this
issue, and a new Missing Hub was being established within the MASSH team,
in June 2017 as this inspection commenced. Dedicated staff are now in place to
ensure that children are offered a return interview. Inspectors saw immediate
improvements in the response. However, it is too early to evaluate the
sustainability of these changes.
oversight. Parents are encouraged to register with the local authority, and clear
guidance is available to parents as to mutual requirements and expectations
from the Parents and Schools Support Service. Families who come to the local
authoritys notice are offered a home visit by the service, which makes
enquiries to ensure that children are safe and assesses the quality of provision.
The team continues to offer support, advice and guidance to parents while
children remain educated at home. Currently, 153 pupils are educated at home.
There is good joint working between education, health and childrens services
to address the needs of children missing education. At the time of the
inspection, Stockport is currently investigating the whereabouts of eight
children who are missing education. Safeguarding concerns are appropriately
investigated, including when there are concerns that families have returned to
their country of origin.
present is understood, well managed and considered in multi-agency forums
such as the multi-agency risk assessment conference. Consistent and effective
representation from partners means that information and intelligence are
shared and acted upon appropriately to ensure that children are protected. A


broad range of evidence-based and well-evaluated services to address domestic
abuse are provided under the partnership umbrella of the Alliance for Positive
Relationships (APR). Victims and perpetrators are provided with individual and
group-based support to seek to prevent the continuation of abusive
relationships, and, when necessary, free legal advice and refuge
accommodation to ensure childrens safety. During 2016, 70 families who
received services through the APR had no further reported incidents of
domestic abuse within six months of closure.
the effects and impact of substance misuse. The Mosaic service provides a
range of evidence-based therapeutic and support services to children and
families. The Think Family programme offers support to substance-misusing
parents in a group or one-to-one setting, focusing on the impact of their
behaviour on their children. Children of substance-misusing parents can receive
weekly therapeutic sessions. Regular evaluation of the service with children and
families at the start and end of interventions provides information to measure
change over time. Positive change for clients has also been supported through
the development of a peer-mentoring scheme. Current and ex-service-users
can attend the accredited programme as a stepping stone to accessing further
training and employment opportunities.
homeless, there is a clear protocol and well-embedded pathway for joint
assessments between social care and Stockport Homes. Prompt joint
assessments are done, and when children have additional needs and
vulnerabilities they are assessed as to whether they need to be looked after.
There is a range of housing options available and no young person is
accommodated in unsuitable accommodation, such as bed and breakfast
provision. The allocation of a personal adviser to every young person means
that they receive a tailored support plan to ensure that risk and support needs
are well managed.
private fostering arrangements. Good arrangements are in place to support
them and to raise awareness in the communities about private fostering.
be at risk of radicalisation. A small number of children are managed through
the Channel Panel, which considers all children identified as at risk.
Assessments consider the nature and extent of the risk and agree actions to
support children, including safeguarding matters, with plans developed to divert
young people away from extremist behaviour.
female genital mutilation. This has resulted in a small number of assessments
and investigations when agencies have identified concerns about children being
at risk. At the time of the inspection, there were no children in Stockport being
worked with because of concerns about female genital mutilation.


professionals are well managed. The designated officer offers advice and
guidance and escalates appropriately to allegation management meetings,
which are well attended. However, inspectors saw that not all partners notified
the LADO promptly and have not always responded to requests for further
information. However, further work is needed with partner agencies to remind
them of their responsibilities to share information to ensure that children are
safe. (Recommendation)


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Stockport is committed to, and good at, ensuring that children only become looked
after when it is in their best interests. Thresholds for entry into care are applied
appropriately, and are informed by comprehensive, multi-agency agreed risk
assessments.
Most children live close to their communities in stable, good-quality homes with
dedicated and well-supported foster carers. When children are placed outside the
authority, the majority receive the same level of care and support as children
placed in the borough.
Assessments and care plans are of a good quality and are regularly reviewed.
However, the quality of case-recording is inconsistent and limits the usefulness of
the available information.
The education of children looked after is closely monitored by the virtual school
head, and children generally make progress at a similar rate and attain as well as
children looked after across England. Most attend a good or better school, and
have access to additional education funding to help progression. Childrens physical
and emotional health is promoted by a specialist and co-located team of health
practitioners.
Children only return to the care of their parents following full assessments of risk,
and with a well-designed support package. When children remain in care, contact
with their families is facilitated well and supervised effectively. Some children
looked after are supported by the childrens participation team, but there is
insufficient advocacy and there are not enough independent visitors. The response
to child sexual exploitation concerns is good. New arrangements for return home
interviews for those missing from care were introduced during the course of the
inspection but the arrangements are yet to be embedded.
When a childs plan is for adoption, they receive an exemplary service.
Assessments of the childs needs and the suitability of potential adopters is of
excellent quality, and subsequent adoptive placements are well supported.
Children leaving care are supported well. Their pathway to independence is started
sufficiently early and once in leaving care provision they are encouraged to keep
engaged with workers to access ongoing assistance if necessary. There have been
recent issues on the availability of supported housing accommodation. Further
work is also needed to improve support for educational achievement and work
opportunities.


Inspection findings
The number has increased over the past year in line with national and regional
trends, from 295 in March 2016. Inspectors looked at this issue in depth and
concluded that only those children who needed to be looked after were being
accommodated and taken before the courts. Effective, timely and appropriate
decision-making results in children only becoming looked after when it is in
their best interests. Comprehensive and well-informed assessments also enable
senior managers to make informed decisions.
relationship with the Child and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) and the courts, and a proactive legal service, which ensures that
social work teams are well informed of guidance and good practice. The Public
Law Outline is used effectively with families to address areas of concern. The
clear advice and support on individual cases from the in-house barrister and
legal officers, in tandem with briefings, case consultation and training sessions
provided to social workers, lead to appropriate proceedings being completed
within a 26-week threshold. The quality of assessments, plans and informationsharing by increasingly skilled social workers was identified by Cafcass and the
judiciary as a crucial component in minimising delay for children.
finder is allocated for each child. In the 12 months up to March 2017, 17
children had been matched at panel in permanent foster homes. Permanence
with independent fostering agency carers is also considered positively.
Childrens futures have been further secured by a range of orders: 17% of
children (26) who left care since April 2016 did so through special guardianship
orders, of whom 10% are with former foster carers.
saw many examples of highly effective direct work with children to support
understanding of their history, and involving them in the development of their
care plans. Particular sensitivity was seen in a number of cases in which social
workers adapted tools to respond to the childs level of understanding. The
majority of statutory visits are undertaken within timescales, and additional
visits are made at times of increasing need or potential risk. When appropriate,
children are seen alone. The generic childcare teams are reducing the
incidences of children having multiple changes in social worker.
needs considered appropriately, including sensitive attention being paid to
meeting the needs arising from childrens unaccompanied asylum seeker status
and/or sexuality.
some children. It recognises the impact on individual children and is fully aware
of the reasons behind each move. Weekly tracking meetings, which include
IROs and commissioners, interrogate circumstances, which then serve to inform


placement planning, new accommodation initiatives, and specialised foster
carer recruitment.
clear actions and timescales. They are fully discussed at children looked after
reviews. Updated actions are agreed with children, and appropriate partners, to
progress positive outcomes in all aspects of childrens lives. Recording on some
childrens case files, especially in case summaries and chronologies, could be
strengthened to better evidence decision-making and case progression, which is
especially important for children wishing to access their care histories in the
future. (Recommendation)
boundaries are strong. Careful commissioning of placements means that
although 30% are deemed to be placed out of area, the majority of those are in
very close proximity to Stockport. Appropriate systems are in place to ensure
that children placed outside Stockport have timely and suitable arrangements
for health and education services, which are monitored to the same standard as
those living inside the authority boundaries.
both direct and indirect contact with childrens birth families. Complex contact
arrangements are managed well by social workers, and facilitated or supervised
by a range of agencies to ensure that they are a quality experience for children.
after when there are concerns about child sexual exploitation. There are
appropriate multi-agency strategy meetings to coordinate the work of agencies
when there are repeat and increasing concerns. However, in the past year only
had gone missing from care. As a response to these issues, the local authority
introduced a new Missing Hub, which commenced on the first day of the
inspection. The team has delivered some improvement in performance in the
offer of return home interviews; however, it is too soon for this to demonstrate
sustainable improvement.
recent collaboration with a range of health agencies, including co-location of
childrens looked after nurses with social work teams, is having a positive
impact on performance. The proportion of children having dental checks is
improving at 86%, and annual health assessments are completed for 92% of
children looked after, including those who are placed out of area. Initial health
assessments are completed by a community paediatrician, with the quality
overseen by the named nurse for children looked after. Children benefit from a
fully engaged and effective team, which adjusts clinic timings and time
available to meet the needs and availability of children, carers and occasional
interpreters. The majority of children who are looked after who have additional
needs relating to their emotional health and well-being receive increasingly
effective and timely support. The appointment of a psychologist within the
children looked after team is supporting improvements in timeliness of referrals


to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS) and other
therapeutic service providers, as well as the consultation offer to social workers
and carers.
attain as well, as children looked after across England. The virtual school team
closely monitors the progress of children looked after, and most make better
progress than before they became looked after, particularly some of those at
the outstanding pupil referral unit and the school for young parents.
Achievements in GCSE A*C in English and mathematics increased from 14.3%
in 2014/15 to 22.2% in 2015/16. The proportion of children looked after that
attained five or more GCSEs at grades A*C increased to 28% in 2015/16, from
acknowledge the achievement gap between children looked after and other
children is still too wide, despite these improvements.
instances in which this is not the case, the choice of school is made in the best
interests of the child. There are clear processes in place for matching children
with an appropriate school when they move to a placement outside of the local
authority area. Transitions between educational phases, and when a school
move is necessary, are well managed with good support for the child. The
virtual school team works very effectively with schools as part of the TAS to
ensure that barriers to progress are quickly identified and addressed.
funding to help them make progress and raise their aspirations around areas
that interest them. Examples seen by inspectors include singing, piano lessons
and horse-riding. Particularly good use is made of funding to improve support
in school for children, for example to help increase their resilience, and to
address bullying and attachment issues.
attend regularly are supported well by School Age Plus workers. The local
authority maintains clear records of children who do not attend school for at
least 25 hours per week and supports them well to continue to learn and return
to full-time education. Five of the 16 children who are currently in that category
are between schools following a placement move, and seven have needs that
require reduced timetables. There are a further six children who access
alternative provision for at least part of their timetable and these pupils are
making good progress.
years and these show good involvement of all agencies involved with the child.
The vast majority of files seen by inspectors were good. Weaker PEPs are
characterised by insufficient analysis of the childs needs, incomplete sections
and targets that are not sufficiently clear.
meets the needs of children well. Fostering recruitment is sharply targeted and
based on a well-informed understanding of childrens needs and gaps in


resources. A recent campaign to secure 15 carer households for older
teenagers and sibling groups has been successful. The local authority fostering
service works closely with local independent fostering agencies to ensure that
children are placed within Stockport or nearby to better support family contact
placements for brothers and sisters, and a significant number offer staying put
arrangements beyond the age of 18. This has resulted in 13 of the 22 children
who have reached 18 most recently having had confirmation of a staying put
arrangement to support improved outcomes and learning opportunities.
such as intensive therapeutic parenting courses, which are also made available
to connected persons. They are supported by the authority to enable children in
their care to have good access to a range of leisure activities, and have
individualised delegated authority to make appropriate day-to-day decisions to
normalise childrens experiences. Support and training to foster carers and
children in placement are given high priority by the supervising social workers.
Carers are further supported by the provision of evening and weekend support
of fostering outreach workers.
and a limited number of TAC meetings. They have high caseloads of around
Children looked after reviews are generally timely, with approximately 94%
held within timescales. Children are well supported to participate in their
reviews by carers, learning mentors and the Mosaic team. When childrens care
plans or actions agreed at review are not being progressed quickly enough by
relevant agencies, IROs make good and effective use of the escalation process
to secure compliance. (Recommendation)
independent visitors. Although children who met with inspectors indicated that
their social workers advocate well on their behalf, their ability to challenge the
care or support they receive is compromised by a lack of advocacy and by
insufficient independent visitor services. (Recommendation)
improve the quality of service that children receive. Examples include
involvement in social worker and team manager interviewing panels, the
redesign of leaflets about the Pledge for young people, and the development of
training and awareness-raising regarding bullying and transgender issues for
carers and schools.


The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is outstanding

vigorously as a permanence option for all children who need it. This begins with
scrupulous scrutiny of information about children entering care. Once identified,
meticulous and frequent monitoring of the adoption tracker and the allocation
of a dedicated family finder ensure that the service knows exactly where each
child is up to on their potential adoption journey.
children of any delays and rigorously challenge why these occurred. The
learning gathered continues to be used exceptionally well to avoid and minimise
delay, and is embedded in the practice expectations of the service. This has
created a tangible sense of urgency for children to live with their adoptive
family as soon as possible.
identifying families in a timely way. Profiling and matching are highly
developed, and sophisticated shortlisting techniques support the effective
identification of the adopters most likely to meet the childs needs. Stockport is
the lead agency of Adoption Counts, a regional adoption agency. Through this,
very good use is made of collaboration and networking with other regional and
national adoption agencies.
As a result of this embedded, high-quality practice, some children have been
matched within a matter of days of the Placement Order being granted. Among
the children that the local authority places each year, there is increasing
success in finding adopters within the childs timescales for the significant
numbers of older children, brothers and sisters, children who have specific
cultural needs, and children who have complex health needs and uncertain
prognoses.
and sister groups with children up to the age of nine. Most children, though not
all, were White British, which reflects the local community. In the last 12
months there have been a small number of cases in which the local authority
has been unable to achieve an adoption placement in line with government
timescales. In these cases, the services strong commitment, tenacity and
persistence in achieving adoption was the right plan for those children, despite
taking longer than usual.
attachments with their adoptive families quickly by the proactive and carefully
considered use of concurrent placements and fostering to adopt. Four children
are placed in concurrent placements specifically commissioned from a local


Voluntary Adoption Agency, and a further 12 children have benefitted from
fostering to adopt since 2014.
identified needs of Stockports children. Eighteen adoptive families were
approved in the last 12 months and the vast majority have had placements.
This illustrates how effective and targeted recruitment can attract suitable
adopters who can best meet childrens needs. Enquirers who are unable to
consider, or meet, those identified needs are dealt with sensitively. The
rigorous monitoring of timeliness of adopters approvals has successfully
reduced avoidable delays within the local authoritys control.
adopters reports (PARs) are well written, child-focused and analytical, and
capture well what adopters can offer. Adopters who met inspectors were
unanimously very positive about the service from first contact to beyond the
adoption order. They said that assessments were thorough, in depth, probing
and sensitive. Adopters talked about good access to training post-placement
and excellent ongoing support.
child focus of all assessment and matching work presented to them. Inspectors
saw adoption panel members providing good, informed challenge, including
deferring for additional work when they deemed this necessary.
to ensure the stability of placements. Due to the use of research, and learning
from childrens and adopters experiences, adoption support plans are
comprehensive and regularly reviewed. In addition to the excellent social work
support, there is easy access to a wide range of tailored training and support
groups, and good use of the Adoption Support Fund.
adoption order is granted. Over the last year, the access to birth records service
has provided specialist counselling for 25 adopted adults about their adoption.
Over 200 arrangements are currently coordinated by the Letterbox service. This
includes the service supporting a group of birth mothers whose children had
been placed for adoption to set up the excellent Cameo group. Recently the
women applied for funding to make a film to share with adopters about their
experiences and the importance to them of ongoing information and contact.


The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

well-coordinated support from a one-stop shop at the Grand Central retail and
leisure complex that enables them to move successfully into adulthood. Care
leavers enjoy stable and enduring relationships with staff and carers who meet
their needs, and contact is maintained well into their twenties. The vast
majority feel safe and secure in suitable and safe housing that includes staying
put with their foster carers or becoming successful tenants in their own
properties.
people, especially in trying to maintain contact even with those who are more
difficult to engage. Staff are relentless in their work to create a good network of
support for young people to improve the quality of their lives and provide the
help they need. Intensive support workers provide valued additional support,
including in the evenings and weekends, for care leavers who need more help
in moving to independence.
effective. Risks are identified well and are responded to effectively, including
referral to relevant support agencies, such as Aspire. The majority of pathway
plans are comprehensive and reviewed regularly, and most are used well to
help young people to focus on their next steps.
voluntary sector results in care leavers having easier access to services to meet
their needs. Staff from these agencies spend time at the one-stop shop, which
means that discussions and referrals happen quickly and avoid delays in
support for care leavers.
between care leaving staff and the looked after children nurse helps young
people to usually receive prompt healthcare. Care leavers can access their
health information and this is transferred to their general practitioner. Young
people are being consulted about a forthcoming health passport, but this is not
currently available. A small number of relevant care leavers take up the option
of a health MOT. Although access to adult mental health services can be a
challenge, the mental health practitioner, who works from the one-stop shop,
helps care leavers to access services more rapidly.
housing and sole tenancies through Stockport Homes. Fortnightly panel
meetings ensure a good oversight of care leavers accommodation. A very small
number are in custody and therefore deemed to be in unsuitable
accommodation; all have plans in place for accommodation on release.
Increasing numbers of care leavers stay put with their former foster carers;


currently this comprises 28 young people. No care leaver is in bed and
breakfast accommodation. The recent closure of a number of properties has
resulted in too many care leavers with greater support needs being housed in
temporary support accommodation, without access to on-site support that was
previously available. Care leavers who met inspectors acknowledged the
circumstances, but raised the quality of the supportive accommodation as an
issue for them. (Recommendation)
authority is increasingly listening to them, including keeping contact well
beyond the age of 28, for example through celebratory cards and providing
access to support. Care leavers are involved in the CiCC. A voluntary
organisation also runs have your say groups to gather care leavers views to
further improve services.
enjoyed by many care leavers and staff, including outings and dances. A
voluntary organisation offers support through Caf Zest, a drop-in centre that
includes health support and guidance from high-quality volunteers. Thirty-eight
young people are also matched with well-trained mentors who support them
with confidence-building and access to leisure and other activities, such as
interviews.
employment, including care leavers, have a range of support, including a
dedicated worker and access to pre-employment workshops with financial
incentives to attend. Increasing percentages of children looked after and care
leavers are engaged in employment or education, with over 95% participation
at age 16 and 17. Across all ages, 58% of care leavers are engaged in
education, employment or training, an increase from previous years but much
lower than Stockports overall figure for young people of 81%. Too few young
people are taking part in the supported apprenticeship scheme offered to young
people in care and care leavers. Those young people who do enter the
apprenticeship scheme are supported well to succeed by understanding
managers with flexibility in attendance when needed, such as part-time for a
young mother. Supported internships are enjoyed by a small number of young
people with a learning difficulty or disability. Progression to higher education is
relatively low for Stockport care leavers, currently at 8% of the care leavers.
(Recommendation)
that they have their passport, driving licence and national insurance numbers.
Many care leavers take up the free driving lessons available to them. All young
people who have been in the care of Stockport have access to a leisure pass,
which they report as being very helpful in supporting them with healthy
activities.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
In the last two years, the local authority has spearheaded an ambitious
programme of cultural and structural transformation of how agencies work with
children and families, known as Stockport Family. It is based on a clear strategic
vision of improving outcomes for vulnerable children through restorative practice.
While it is too early to evaluate in full the difference the model is making, since the
local authority was last inspected in 2012, services for children have improved at
every stage of the childs journey, despite increased demand.
Plans across all strategic boards, including the Health and Wellbeing Board, are
well aligned based on shared priorities agreed by the Childrens Trust. Clear
governance arrangements avoid duplication and fragmentation. Strategic planning
is well informed by a detailed understanding of local need, and good
commissioning arrangements mean that many children and families benefit from
high-quality effective social work practice and services.
The DCS and his senior leadership team ensure that practice development is
informed by research, feedback from children and best practice elsewhere. They
are proactive in promoting improvements within Stockport and the region. Senior
leaders have a clear understanding of what is happening on the frontline and act
quickly when improvement is needed. The local authority knows itself well and has
identified further improvements that can be made in its performance management
and quality assurance. At present, the quality of performance management data is
variable and lacks analysis. While the local authority routinely audits casework as
part of its quality assurance of practice, some auditors are overly positive and this
does not support staff development.
Staff are enthusiastic about their work and are highly committed. However, social
work and IRO caseloads are too high and action taken to increase capacity has not
yet matched demand for services. Due to time pressures, supervision of social
workers, while regular, does not always include sufficient reflection or challenge.
The local authority has made some significant improvements in the quality of
practice, such as its response to children who go missing. These changes are very
recent and their effectiveness is yet to demonstrate sustainability.
The local authority is a committed corporate parent, ensuring that children looked
after receive effective support into adulthood and beyond. Elected members would
benefit from greater awareness of local and national initiatives.


Inspection findings
significantly improved since the last Ofsted inspection in 2012. Services for
children in need of help and protection, children looked after and care leavers
are now good. Services for children in need of adoption are outstanding. In the
last two years the local authority and partners have embarked on an ambitious
programme of cultural and structural transformation known as Stockport
Family. The changes are based on sound principles of children only needing to
tell their story once, and a restorative approach to working with families to be
shared across agencies. The programme is currently in the second year of a
five-year plan, and there is more to be done to embed the model across all
agencies. While it is too soon to evaluate the discrete difference the model is
making in improving outcomes for children, the structural changes have
resulted in children remaining with social workers and childrens locality teams
who know them well, and who are tenacious in promoting their welfare.
within Stockport Council. This is reflected in strategic planning that is coherent
and well aligned to priorities set by the Childrens Trust. Clear governance
arrangements between the trust and other strategic boards avoid duplication
and fragmentation. Scrutiny of progress and service delivery is enhanced by
active engagement of partner agencies within a culture of constructive support
and challenge.
leaders in childrens services. Cross-party political support for the Stockport
Family model is strong, recognising that it will not deliver the improvements
anticipated immediately. The council has recently agreed additional support,
through the release of cash reserves, to increase staffing due to a greater
demand for services. This demonstrates a council-wide commitment to ensuring
that the current good quality of services to vulnerable children and families is
maintained and built upon at a time of financial austerity.
Co-location of some partners within the MASSH and with locality teams has
evident benefits in promoting effective information-gathering and developing a
shared understanding of complex cases. The local authority has made
significant investment in training partner agencies. Additional support to schools
through social work link workers, and direct work provided by School Age Plus
workers, is increasing capacity and confidence within education facilities to
provide children with appropriate early-help support using restorative
approaches.
understanding of local need set out in its joint strategic needs assessment.
Effective commissioning practices ensure value for money from high-quality
services that are demonstrably improving outcomes for children and care
leavers.


arrangements has been limited. While an external review of its effectiveness
has recently been completed, proposed changes are yet to be agreed.
Nevertheless, joint commissioning arrangements between childrens social care
and health are moving towards greater integration at a pace. Rigorous analysis
of patterns and trends across agencies, overseen by the Childrens Trust, is
enabling partners to reconfigure services to be more responsive to childrens
needs. For example, plans are in place for an outreach CAMHS service delivered
to the areas of most need.
to learn from others and to disseminate good practice both within Stockport
and within the region. Recent activities include peer reviews, collaboration with
other local authorities, and membership of initiatives to improve practice
through learning based on the experience of children and young people. The
local authority is an active participant in regional and national forums to
improve the quality of social work training and practice. This includes strong
links regionally with local universities through the teaching partnership,
participation in research and collaboration with the national social work
leadership board. Learning is regularly shared with staff, engendering a culture
of continuous improvement.
participation team supports children in need and children looked after to raise
issues and make complaints if unresolved. The use of the respond system
identifies the key learning from cases, makes managers aware and monitors
that this has been actioned. The wider learning is disseminated to further
improve performance.
staff have access to a good range of opportunities for career progression and
personal development. Like many authorities, Stockport mostly recruits newly
qualified staff. It is committed to developing staff through provision of a range
of good external and internal training. Pathways for staff progression, from
recently qualified social workers to supporting future leaders, are clear and well
promoted. Training includes the learning from quality assurance of casework.
The local authority recognises that its current evaluation of training is too
dependent on self-reporting on the day, and it is in the early stages of
supplementing it through themed auditing activity.
organisation through internal promotion and development opportunities, staff
turnover remains lower than comparators. However, the current capacity of the
workforce to meet an increased demand for services is overstretched. Casework
has become increasingly complex, and there has been an increase in numbers
of children subject to a child protection plan and becoming looked after.
Forward planning to create additional posts has not been sufficient to meet the
demand. While the local authority is in the process of recruiting an additional
specialist team to work with children who have highly complex needs to
increase capacity, social work caseloads, including those for newly qualified


workers, are too high. Inspectors have not identified any unsafe practice due to
these demands and most practice seen is good. However, some staff report
increasing detriment to their worklife balance and some struggle to access
training. (Recommendation)
evident regular and purposeful conversations about casework. While formal
supervision and managerial oversight are also regular, both are often brief and
lacking reflection and, when necessary, challenge. Some records of decisionmaking would not help children to understand the reasons decisions were made
if they choose to access their records in later life. (Recommendation)
local authoritys understanding of frontline practice, is variable. While the local
authority has a wealth of generally accurate performance management
information and the performance dashboard used in locality teams provides
useful live information, it is not sufficiently comprehensive or detailed to
support oversight of practice within all parts of the service. Managers within the
MASSH and within the early-help service cannot easily measure the timeliness
of services children receive. While regular performance management meetings
are held, these are often focused on process and do not explore underlying
causation for emerging themes. Written analysis of performance management
data to form hypotheses and identify underlying trends is largely absent. The
local authority is taking action to increase capacity to support analysis and to
include all services in the performance dashboard. However, at the point of the
inspection, interpretation of data is too dependent on the individual expertise of
managers at all levels in the organisation and of elected members.
and review. While findings from routine quality assurance replicate many of the
inspectors findings, the quality of the local authoritys auditing during the
inspection was variable, with a minority of audits overoptimistic in their
evaluation of practice. This can give the wrong messages to staff about
expected standards. The local authority recognises that the right balance
between supporting staff at a time of increased pressure and ensuring that
consistency of expectation has not always been achieved. It is reviewing its
auditing practice following findings from this inspection.
activity, such as observations of practice and mapping of childrens experiences.
As a result, most of the areas of development identified through this inspection
were known to senior leaders, with action planned, or already taken, to support
practice improvement.
elected members take their responsibilities as a corporate parent seriously. The
local authority recognises that a good parents support of their children does
not stop at age 21. Care leavers can continue to receive support from an
effective commissioned service throughout their lives, and the local authority
maintains links with care leavers still further by communication with them


through birthday cards and newsletters. This gives care leavers an important
message that the local authority is still there as a source of support should they
require it in later life. Childrens participation to inform practice improvement is
well established in Stockport at a casework and strategic level. The small but
dynamic CiCC is regularly consulted and its views valued and acted upon.
Improvements, as a result of childrens participation, include training for
professionals on gender and sexuality, by young people themselves, and
childrens recent involvement in interview panels for staff. Children looked after
and care leavers achievements are celebrated in an annual awards ceremony,
which is well attended by members of the corporate parenting working party,
who are justifiably proud of what children looked after have accomplished.
However, elected members, who are part of this group, would benefit from a
more detailed understanding of regional and national initiatives to spur on the
council-wide ambition for children looked after and care leavers.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
to be good
Executive summary
The Stockport Safeguarding Children Board (SSCB) is on a journey of improvement
following a period when board members described it as weak. There is good
awareness of the work undertaken so far and the developments still needed. The
new independent chair has brought increased focus, drive and challenge. Priorities
and structures have been reviewed and, where possible, the board has looked at
ways of jointly approaching safeguarding activity. This includes shared high-quality
policies and procedures with other local authorities in Greater Manchester, merging
of some subgroups with the Adult Safeguarding Board, and a joint child death
overview panel (CDOP) with two other authorities.
There is good attendance at the main board. However, there is still insufficient
partner contribution at some subgroups and at training events. Financial
contributions by partner agencies have not increased over the last six years, apart
from that by childrens services.
Governance arrangements are appropriate. Although the board demonstrates
some influence in informing other strategic bodies, there is still work to do in
shaping the work with the Health and Wellbeing Board. Serious case reviews
(SCRs) are carefully considered and appropriately initiated, with effective
dissemination of learning. However, not all actions have been completed in a
timely manner.
There is effective oversight and action in some areas of its work, but the SSCB
needs to further improve its monitoring and evaluation of frontline practice.
Performance data is too broad and does not provide a clear picture of childrens
experiences. Quality assurance activity is too reliant on single-agency audits,
limiting the boards ability to identify local issues to inform priorities that will
improve multi-agency practice and hold partners to account.
The board ensures that there is sufficient high-quality training, and a
commissioned evaluation showed that partners found the learning useful. The
board has recently started to evaluate the impact of training on frontline practice.
A strength of the board is its understanding of children vulnerable to child sexual
exploitation, and of those who go missing, through their detailed problem profile,
the clear strategies which drive this work, and the challenge made to partner
agencies, which has recently improved missing children return home interviews.


Recommendations
 Review partners contribution to the board to ensure that the SSCB is
appropriately resourced.
 Improve the coordination of work with other strategic bodies.
 Ensure that there are focused priorities for the SSCB, which can be actioned
and measured to improve outcomes for children and their families.
 Ensure that recommendations from SCRs are clear, with responsibilities and
timescales identified.
 Ensure that multi-agency audits are regular and focused on improving
practice.
 Improve the focus and analysis of key performance data.

Inspection findings
appropriate membership of sufficiently senior managers to enable key decisions
to be made. Governance arrangements are clear and appropriate, with the
independent chair meeting quarterly with senior managers and leaders through
the well-established safeguarding accountabilities meetings. This ensures that
the board is held to account for meeting its statutory responsibilities, and
provides a platform for the safeguarding board to challenge partners.
been appropriate and purposeful to improve the board and address previous
weaknesses. The strategy is to align the work of the Safeguarding Children
Board with the Adult Safeguarding Board (ASB) as part of a shared ambition to
provide a life-course approach across safeguarding. The aims are to break
down age barriers in accessing services, provide a family approach to
safeguarding, and maximise board and partner resources. Priorities have been
agreed through a joint development day, and restructuring of subgroups is
being progressed. This includes merging of training, early-help and
communication subgroups, while establishing complex safeguarding and
domestic abuse groups. Appropriate business processes are now in place, with
formal reporting from each subgroup to the implementation subgroup on
progress against each of the priorities.
broad. For example, one of the priorities is to improve transitions that children
experience. Partners recognise that this is a huge task. The three-year business


plan is detailed but could be improved by clarifying what the measurable impact
will be for children. (Recommendation)
strong commitment to the main board, there are a number of areas where this
needs to improve  for example, attendance at some subgroups and at
safeguarding training is weak. Financial contributions have not increased over
the last six years, with the exception of social care. (Recommendation)
safeguarding responsibilities. Agencies produce a report under section 11 of the
Children Act 2004 on a two-year rolling cycle. These reports are moderated
through the quality assurance and performance management subgroup
providing appropriate challenge and, if necessary, actions to be completed to
improve practice. The board has recently reviewed and improved its section 11
audit form and processes to ensure that it aligns with work across Greater
Manchester. This prevents duplication of work for partners and includes the
voice of children as part of the evaluation.
Board (HWB) for it to assert its influence. The independent chair sits on the
Childrens Trust and has a shared agenda with other strategic bodies, including
the Safer Stockport Partnership (SSP), who share domestic abuse as a priority,
and the Childrens Trust in its work on transitions. The board has
memorandums of understanding in place with the HWB, the SSP and the ASB
but recognises that this is also needed with the Childrens Trust to capitalise on
the work of each board in improving safeguarding for children.
(Recommendation)
safeguarding board website. The board has adopted the Greater Manchester
safeguarding procedures, while maintaining specific locally derived guidance.
This maximises skills, knowledge, resources and learning, and provides a clear
basis for ensuring consistency of services for children across these authorities.
The Stockport policy and practice subgroup focuses appropriately on localising
national guidance, including in the areas of female genital mutilation, child
sexual exploitation and neglect, to ensure that these reflect local needs,
pathways and services.
manager uses the learning from section 11 audits to identify training needs of
partners and, when necessary, provides bespoke training to meet that need.
The subgroup has developed a useful training matrix for practitioners working
with children to help identify what safeguarding training they need based on
their job. The training manager has developed specific safeguarding packs for
partners to deliver, and has observed the training to ensure that it is of high
quality, which is good practice.
provides e-learning, classroom-based training opportunities and the use of


learning circles to broaden its reach. For example, the board has made a video
for agencies to disseminate learning from SCRs in identifying significant harm
with babies. A pool of experienced staff drawn from across the partnership
supports delivery of face-to-face learning. However, the number of partner
trainers is reducing, and overall partner attendance is poor, at approximately
through to the main board, resulting in the implementation of a charging policy
for non-attenders.
SCRs, including the role of men within the home and disguised compliance. An
independently commissioned evaluation showed that agencies found the
training useful and impactful. The board has recently moved to an electronic
booking system, which will automatically request feedback from practitioners
attending all SSCB training. However, this is in its infancy and it is too early to
determine its impact.
by partners and appropriately initiates an SCR when criteria are met. There are
five completed reviews with action plans being progressed and one review in
progress. Themes from these reviews are identified effectively and collated into
a single multi-agency implementation plan. The quality assurance and
performance management subgroup holds partners to account against each
theme. This includes additional scrutiny and challenge through moderation
sessions. This is good practice. The learning from SCRs is distributed effectively
through a multifaceted approach, including seven-minute briefings, large-scale
events, themed training and multi-agency learning circles. Inspectors found
that most of the social workers spoken to as part of the inspection of childrens
services were aware of the SCRs and could articulate the lessons learned from
the reviews.
independent chair and the improvements made to the workings of the board.
Since the last Ofsted inspection, the quality of SCR reports has not been
consistently good, with recommendations and action plans that are not specific
and are difficult to progress. Agencies have taken timely corrective action as
practice deficiencies have been identified, and all partners are held to account
for all practice themes identified through the multi-agency implementation plan.
However, as a result of a lack of specific and clear recommendations, partners
experienced difficulties keeping to original timescales and deadlines.
(Recommendation)
Trafford, and is chaired independently, with effective communication supported
by the independent CDOP manager. The annual report for 201516 provides
clear information concerning notifications received and closed down, and
identifies themes. A core group of experienced professionals, who review all
child deaths through well-established systems, supports CDOP. The panel
identifies core themes for individual localities as well as across Greater
Manchester, and disseminates lessons learned through training delivered by the


manager. Cross-cutting themes, such as infant mortality, have led to the
development of a sector-led improvement programme overseen by public
health. Local themes, such as safe sleeping, have led to tangible actions,
including working in partnership with a national supermarket chain to enable
parents to purchase cots at cost price and radio campaigns to raise the profile
of safe sleeping.
detailing the interrelationships between each quality assurance function.
However, multi-agency auditing is not yet embedded in the work of the board.
The SSCB is heavily reliant on single-agency audits as the main source of
information on safeguarding practice. Given the boards limited resources and
capacity, the priority has focused on testing corrective actions and learning
from the SCRs. For example, health partners audited their response to the
journey of the child for children under the age of one to test whether
vulnerabilities and safeguarding concerns are identified at the earliest
opportunity. The board has reviewed other multi-agency audits. For example,
those completed by the Childrens Trust focusing on safeguarding families have
been presented to the quality and performance management subgroup.
(Recommendation)
not provide a concise picture of childrens safeguarding experiences, services
provided or their outcomes. The board receives extensive information from
partners, but the way in which it is presented means that it is difficult to
identify trends and themes. The board has recognised this issue and the
dataset is currently being reviewed. (Recommendation)
of return home interviews for children missing was a concern. This led to formal
challenge and the unlocking of additional resources to improve services for
these vulnerable children. The new Missing Hub commenced during the
inspection.
exploitation and children who go missing. The board understands the nature
and extent of children at risk of child sexual exploitation and those who go
missing from home and care through detailed problem profiles, which inform
their multi-agency child sexual exploitation and missing strategies. Targeted
work includes campaigns to raise the profile of these issues, including child
sexual exploitation awareness week, a week dedicated to engaging children
and young people, communities and wider partners in recognising concerns.
Other developments include the implementation of a risk matrix to help schools
identify concerns, and the establishment of a residential provider forum to raise
awareness of these issues with external providers when children are placed in
Stockport.
safeguarding issues, including female genital mutilation, trafficked children and
gangs, though its newly established complex safeguarding subgroup.


board and its subgroups over the last year and provides some information on
impact against its key priorities. The report successfully highlights further areas
of development, with risks identified, including partners attendance at
subgroups, quality assurance and a lack of data analysis, but does not
sufficiently detail the impact the board has had on partners in improving the
lives of children and young people. For instance, the report presents the data
about the work of the designated officer, private fostering and young carers but
has limited evaluation of this work. The SSCB has identified the further
improvements necessary for the 201617 annual report, which is currently
being prepared.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the differences adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of five of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and two additional inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Neil Penswick
Deputy lead inspector: Shirley Bailey
Team inspectors: John Roughton, Stella Elliott, Judith Nelson, Kath Townsley, Lisa
Summers
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Christine Williams


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


