Stockton-on-Tees Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 May to 16 June 2016
Report published: 5 August 2016

Childrens services in Stockton-on-Tees are good.

Good

permanence

Requires improvement


Requires improvement


Outstanding


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Services to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and young people in
Stockton-on-Tees are good. Highly effective leadership from the director of childrens
services (DCS) sets clear priorities and aspirations to improve outcomes for children
and young people. Inspectors have seen good evidence of sustained improvement
since the last inspection. Political leaders have been responsive to budget pressures,
with additional financial investment where needed, and ensure a robust level of
scrutiny across childrens services. The extent to which all leaders and elected
members within the local authority engage with children and young people is
outstanding.
The local authority knows itself very well. It is good at recognising where service
capacity does not fully meet expected standards and takes effective action to
address this. An extensive programme of external audit, self-assessment and
thematic reviews is used to interrogate service quality and outcomes. The findings
are widely reported across the partnership to ensure that strengths and weaknesses
are known and understood. Regular supervision of frontline staff is one example of
how senior management scrutiny has improved performance. Accurate selfassessment has identified that supervision is not yet of consistently good quality.
However, social workers do feel valued and well supported. They report that senior
managers are highly visible and that they are proud to work in Stockton-on-Tees.
Strong management and leadership by the council and the Stockton-on-Tees Local
Safeguarding Children Board (SLSCB) have led to improved partnership engagement.
A wide range of responsive services are available to children and their families in
need of help and protection. Services have been reorganised to develop a stronger
and more integrated approach to early help. There are many examples of highquality work within projects across the borough. For example, an innovative family
hub is available to families every weekend and provides help with a range of issues.
While children and families have access to effective early help services, this is not yet
leading to a reduction in the number of children who are referred for social care
support. Although contacts and referrals are robustly screened by childrens social
care, thresholds for access to statutory services are not yet fully understood or
applied across the partnership. Senior leaders recognise that more needs to be done
to support agencies to make appropriate referrals to childrens social care. A new
multi-agency childrens hub was implemented in June 2016. This has already begun
to assist professionals to signpost children and young people with a lower threshold
of need to more appropriate services.
There is a highly effective approach to safeguarding and managing risk. When
concerns about a childs or young persons safety are identified, robust action is
taken to safeguard them. Referrals are dealt with in a timely manner, and workers
are allocated cases that are appropriate to their skills and experience. While child
protection enquiries and information sharing are robust, the lack of attendance by
Cleveland police at strategy discussions has an impact on the quality of analysis of


risk at these meetings. Arrangements to safeguard children and young people who
go missing from home or education or who are at risk of being sexually exploited are
effective. However, findings from all missing from home interviews are not analysed
sufficiently to inform childrens individual safety plans, strategic risk management
and prevention planning.
Single assessments are undertaken in childrens timescales and many are informed
by effective use of a theoretical social work model. Most children in need and
protection plans are clear, but not all specify the intended outcomes or timescales for
improvement. Support for children and young people with complex care needs and
disabilities is good.
The consistently high numbers of children looked after are increasing pressure on
placement sufficiency. Effective action is being taken to recruit new foster carers and
develop new childrens homes within the borough. However, not enough support is
available to children and young people who are at risk of becoming looked after.
When children and young people do become looked after, they are provided with
good placements that meet their immediate need for protection. Placement stability
is good. When children need legal permanence, care proceedings progress through
court in a timely way. However, permanence planning is not considered soon enough
for all children. Social workers and their managers lack understanding of the
regulations regarding placements within families and with connected persons.
When children are identified for adoption, effective matching takes place and
placements are well supported. The recruitment of adopters is not sufficiently
targeted, as it is not informed by a written, detailed analysis of need. Fostering to
adopt is underdeveloped. When children are unable to return to their birth family,
they are not supported well to understand their life story or the reason that they
became looked after.
Good arrangements are in place to maintain and improve the health and emotional
needs of children looked after and care leavers. Strong, incisive leadership, and
support and challenge by the virtual headteacher to schools, are helping to drive
improvement in pupils achievements and attendance. Outcomes by the end of key
stages 2 and 4 for children looked after are above those of similar groups nationally,
and the gaps between their achievements and those of other pupils are narrowing.
Collective actions of services that work with care leavers across the council ensure
that they are well supported to develop the skills that they need to move on to
independence. The council is in touch in a meaningful way with all but one care
leaver. With the exception of three young people in custody and one young person
who refuses to engage, all care leavers live in suitable accommodation and remain in
contact with services until they are at least 21. More care leavers move on to
education, employment or training, including the proportion moving on to university,
than similar groups nationally.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates six childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
and three were judged to be outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspections.
The inspection of one childrens home was triggered during the inspection by
concerns regarding supervision of children at the home. The outcome of the
inspection was that the home was again judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in January 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate in
overall effectiveness.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
services was in September 2010. The local authority was judged to be good in
overall effectiveness.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since August 2008.
 The DCS was also responsible for adult services, in a role incorporating both the
DCS and director of adult social services (DASS), until December 2015. In
January 2016, the DASS part of the role ceased due to a senior management
review within the local authority.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2016.
 The local authority has joint contact and referral arrangements with Hartlepool
Borough Council through the formation of a childrens hub, with effect from June
Children living in this area
 Approximately 42,465 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Stockton-on-Tees. This is 21.9% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 21.6% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 17.8% (the national average is 15.6%)
 in secondary schools is 16.2% (the national average is 13.9%).

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8.4% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21.5% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian and Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 6.2% (the national average is 19.4%).
 in secondary schools is 4.7% (the national average is 15.0%).
Child protection in this area
 At 22 May 2016, 2,268 children had been identified through assessment as being
formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from 1,902
at 31 March 2015.
 At 22 May 2016, 294 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 355 at 31 May 2015.
 At 22 May 2016, five children lived in a privately arranged fostering placement.
The number at 22 May 2015 was suppressed.
 Since the last inspection, six serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted, and two serious case reviews have been completed or are ongoing at the
time of this inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 22 May 2016, 398 children are being looked after by the local authority (a rate
of 93.7 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 377 (88.8 per 10,000
children) at 31 May 2015.
 Of this number:
area
 Six live in residential special schools, all of whom live out of the authority
area
 Three children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.


 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 18 adoptions
returned to be looked after
 six children and young people ceased to be looked after and moved on to
independent living
 one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house in
multiple occupation.
The casework models used in this area
 Signs of safety
 Graded care profile


Recommendations

Improve the quality of supervision across childrens services, explicitly linking
supervision to accountability, professional development and ensuring that
the best possible outcomes for children are being pursued.


Ensure that return home interviews are offered to all children who go missing
from home or care, and that each episode is analysed to inform the childs
safety plan and wider strategic planning in relation to prevention and risk
reduction.


Improve the quality and consistency of all childrens and young peoples
plans, ensuring that the overall aim is clear, detailing the services or support
that will be offered, and that reasonable timescales are set which reflect the
childs needs and development.


The local authority should satisfy itself that all placements where children
and young people are placed with connected persons and private fostering
are appropriate, and that all carers are assessed under the relevant
regulation.


Develop edge of care services to respond in a flexible, family-friendly way
to offer realistic alternatives to full-time residential or foster care.


Ensure that the care planning process for children looked after always
considers adoption as a possible permanence option at the four-month
review, including consideration of foster to adopt. In addition, ensure that the
family-finding process begins as soon as adoption becomes the plan
following a statutory review.


Ensure that the best quality legal advice is available to social workers and
their managers to support effective and timely planning for children and
young people.


Ensure that there are sufficient foster carers, residential placements and
potential adopters to meet the needs of the children.


Ensure that when children are separated from their birth families, they have
the opportunity to understand their past and move positively into the future
through the provision of sensitive and timely life-story work.


Continue to challenge and monitor the attendance of Cleveland police at
strategy meetings to ensure compliance with Working Together 2015. In
addition, Her Majestys Chief Inspector will act within the terms of the
published information sharing protocol (agreed between all the relevant
inspectorates) in sharing these findings with HMI Constabulary for it to
decide what course of action is appropriate.


Summary for children and young people
 When children, young people and their families experience difficulties, there are
many professionals available to provide help and support. If children and young
people need protection, experienced social workers and other professionals act
quickly to help to make children safe.
 Some children and young people need to be looked after away from their own
home. When this happens, social workers find good homes with caring adults for
young people.
 When children need to be looked after, social workers always try hard to keep
brothers and sisters together, and make sure that children can still see their
friends and people who are important to them. They do their best to make sure
that children and young people do not have to change schools.
 Social workers make sure that the best adoptive families are found for children
when they cannot return home to live with their parents.
 When children and young people are unable to return home, they need help to
understand the reasons why. This does not happen soon enough, and the council
needs to do much more to help children to understand their history and life
experiences.
 When young people are old enough to leave care, they get good support to stay
with their carers or to move when they are ready to live independently.
 Senior managers and leaders at the council want all children to do well in school.
They make sure that, when they are ready, young people have the support they
need to go to college, university or find a job. Senior managers also make sure
that children and young people have good access to professionals who can help
them to be healthy, stay safe and feel good about themselves.
 Social workers know the children and young people whom they work with very
well. Senior managers and leaders at the council work very hard to make sure
that they listen to children and young people, and understand what they are
saying about the help that they receive. They use what children and young
people tell them to make services better and to do things differently if they need
to.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Services to safeguard children and young people in Stockton-on-Tees are good. A
wide range of responsive services are available to children and their families in need
of help and protection. Services have been reorganised to develop a stronger and
more integrated approach to early help. This is helping to support children and
families as soon as they need it.
While children and families have access to effective early help services, this is not
yet leading to a reduction in the numbers referred for social care support. Although
contacts and referrals are robustly screened by childrens social care, thresholds for
access to statutory services are not yet fully understood or applied. The new multiagency childrens hub that was launched during this inspection is showing very early
signs of positive impact in directing more professionals to help children, young
people and their families with a lower threshold of need.
There is a highly effective approach to safeguarding and managing risk. Children and
young people are protected through effective multi-agency arrangements. There are
robust responses to concerns where children are exposed to domestic violence,
parental substance misuse and parental mental health difficulties. Arrangements to
safeguard children and young people who go missing from home or education or
who are at risk of being sexually exploited are effective. When concerns about a
childs or young persons safety are identified, robust action is taken to safeguard
them. While child protection enquiries and information sharing are robust, the lack of
attendance by Cleveland police at strategy discussions has an impact on the quality
of analysis of risk at these meetings.
Single assessments are undertaken in childrens timescales and many have an
explicit analysis of risk and protective factors, supported by effective use of a social
work model. Most children in need and protection plans are clear, but not all specify
the intended outcomes or timescales for improvement. While supervision of social
workers is regular, it is neither sufficiently challenging nor reflective. Support for
children and young people with complex care needs and disabilities is good.
Allegations of abuse, mistreatment and poor practice by professionals who work with
and have contact with children are managed effectively. Children receive good
support when identified as being in private fostering arrangements. However,
managers and social workers are not always clear about what constitutes such an
arrangement, and so cannot be sure that they are supporting the right children and
their carers appropriately.


Inspection findings

The local authority has effectively prioritised and invested in early help
support. This is having a positive impact, improving outcomes for many
children. A wide range of early help support is available for families. This is
coordinated and delivered via the early help team. This multi-agency team is
social work-led and benefits from access to a wide range of in-house and
commissioned services and a dedicated early help family support service.
Supported by a partnership-wide strategic approach, the local authority has
appropriate plans to enhance and develop services further.


There is good evidence of success in improving outcomes for children and
young people identified through the Troubled Families programme. Further
evidence of targeted help to vulnerable families can be seen in some
innovative projects around the borough, for example the Citizens Advice
Bureau, providing targeted financial advice and support. This has had a
positive impact on 103 families in the first quarter of 2016, preventing
homelessness, managing debt and maximising income. In addition, a
weekend family hub offers help and support to families with a range of
issues, from relationships to childcare, budgeting and housing. The hub is in
an accessible community location, and provides toys, games and internet
access for children to enable parents to make full use of the services
available. This creative project significantly increases the early help on offer
to six days a week, with telephone support available on a Sunday.


During 201516, there has been a 43% increase in the number of early help
assessments completed by partner agencies. This is directly attributable to
the success of a shared objective and ambition across the partnership to
provide a more integrated approach to early help. Skilled and motivated
early help workers both support and challenge professionals to consider the
most appropriate response to children and young people who have a lower
threshold of need. Evidence of the impact of this challenge and support can
be seen in some early help assessments, with improved quality and focus of
assessments and better identification of those children and young people
who need additional protection and support. While early help assessment
quality is improving, management direction at the point of allocation is not
evident. This is leading to some drift in initial contact being made with
children and their families, and a lack of early focus in assessments.
(Recommendation)


Despite the much improved focus on early help, this has not yet led to a
reduction in the number of contacts and referrals to childrens social care.
Although contacts and referrals are robustly screened, thresholds for access
to statutory services are not yet fully understood or applied across the
partnership. The local authority has a detailed understanding of its
performance and its challenges around thresholds, and regularly reviews
and analyses data. Its response has been a continued investment in early


help, ensuring that partner agencies are clear about where they can seek
help and support for families who do not reach the threshold for social care
intervention. In addition, the new childrens hub, launched during this
inspection, is showing early signs of impact, providing advice when contact
is made with childrens social care to determine the best course of action for
the child.

The childrens hub provides Stockton-on-Tees, in partnership with Hartlepool
Borough Council, with a new single point of entry to childrens social care.
This new initiative brings together key agencies across the North Tees area
which deliver services jointly to both boroughs. The childrens hub benefits
from partner agencies being co-located. This is already leading to earlier and
more effective identification of risk, improved information sharing and joint
decision-making. While contacts remain high, the number of strategy
meetings and cases transferred for assessment have been reduced in the
first two weeks of implementation. Information sharing and decision-making
are effective, but the new arrangements currently lack evidence of recorded
management decisions. (Recommendation)


There is a highly effective approach to safeguarding and managing risk. This
includes out-of-hours services shared with a neighbouring authority. Children
and young people are protected through effective multi-agency
arrangements. When concerns about a childs or young persons safety are
identified, robust action is taken to safeguard them. Inspectors did not
identify any child for whom action had not been taken to ensure their safety.
While child protection enquiries and information sharing are robust, the lack
of attendance by Cleveland police at strategy discussions has an impact on
the quality of analysis of risk at these meetings. Senior managers have
repeatedly escalated this concern to senior officers in Cleveland police
without effect. Inspectors referred one case back to senior managers, calling
into question the decision of police to take no further action in one case
when there was clear evidence of children suffering non-accidental injuries.
The local authority did take action to safeguard the children. Senior
managers acted promptly, escalating the inspectors concerns to senior
police officers where the response was robust. This resulted in the concerns
being accepted, and the investigation was re-opened. Consequently, Her
Majestys Chief Inspector will act within the terms of the published
information sharing protocol (agreed between all the relevant inspectorates)
in sharing these findings with HMI Constabulary for it to decide what course
of action is appropriate. (Recommendation)


The vast majority of child protection enquiries are thorough and well
managed. There is clear evidence that children are seen during
investigations and assessments, their voices heard and, where appropriate,
direct work is undertaken. Single assessments are of good quality and are
undertaken in the childs timescale. Assessments are comprehensive and
detailed, contain a good understanding of the childs current circumstances,
and provide a clear analysis of need, which focuses on risks and protective
factors. Effective consideration of historical factors is evident, and social
workers understand the childs journey. Assessments, in the main, are


responsive to diversity issues within families, and recognise childrens and
young peoples unique characteristics and differences.

Children and young people are seen regularly by their social workers. Where
appropriate, they are seen alone, and direct work is undertaken to ascertain
their views and experiences. Where children and young people have
communication difficulties, social workers adopt a variety of communication
styles and bespoke methods to try to understand their views, and to ensure
that their wishes and feelings influence assessments and plans wherever
possible. When children and young people have complex needs, they have
access to good-quality short-break provision. However, children wait too long
for assessments and diagnoses for Autistic Spectrum Disorder. This is being
addressed by joint commissioning approaches, but progress is too slow.


In December 2015, a social work model was introduced to support risk
assessments and analysis and was evident during this inspection. It is
beginning to have a positive impact on identifying risk and protective factors
within families. Well-attended child protection conferences, reviews and core
groups by key agencies, including Cleveland police, demonstrate the
partnership commitment to managing risk and improving outcomes for
children and young people. Minutes of key childrens meetings show a
rigorous consideration of risk, with the rationale for actions clearly recorded.
When cases step down to child in need plans, the threshold is well
evidenced. The impact can be seen in the low numbers of children becoming
subject to child protection plans for a second or subsequent time.


While there is good evidence that child protection chairs are challenging
where drift and delay is occurring, they are not yet having sufficient impact in
progressing some childrens plans, particularly where letters before
proceedings have been issued to parents. Over 50 letters before
proceedings are being managed within fieldwork teams. There is limited
evidence that child protection chairs or frontline managers are getting to
grips with reviewing these cases robustly enough. They are not challenging
legal advisers over when authoritative action needs to be taken in instances
where change is not being achieved soon enough. This is particularly in
cases of chronic neglect or when previous children have been placed
outside their parents care. There is no evidence that, when challenges are
raised with managers, the patterns and themes are collated or analysed to
improve practice. (Recommendation)


There has been a decrease in the number of children subject to child
protection plans and, at the time of the inspection, this stood at 294 (69 per
when children subject to plans equated to 83 per 10,000, nearly double the
rate of national and statistical neighbours, at rates of 45 and 43 respectively.
Neglect is the most common reason for children becoming subject to a child
protection plan in Stockton-on-Tees, at 53%. Although this is below the
national and regional averages, of 61.2% and 57% respectively, the local
authority recognises that neglect is a major issue, and is piloting a social
work model to assist with the assessment of risk. However, it is too early to
evaluate its impact, as the pilot is in the very early stages of implementation.



Child protection plans developed using the social work model are of
significantly better quality than those written prior to its introduction. Plans
resulting from conferences where the model has been applied have a better
focus on outcomes. Parents and professionals accountability is stipulated,
with clear timescales for action, and danger statements are simple to
understand. Outcome-focused actions link clearly to the identified risk
issues, making it easy for families to understand what the concerns are and
what they need to do to improve their childs circumstances. Child in need
plans are weaker and are not yet informed by the model. The difference is
quite stark as, while they do identify risk and need, they are not as clear to
children, their families and professionals on what needs to happen, who is
going to help or the timescales for change. Not all contain a contingency
plan. This means that it is not explicit what action will be taken if a childs
circumstances do not improve. (Recommendation)


Children and young people are supported and encouraged to attend their
conferences and reviews through a commissioned advocacy service. Where
children and young people do not attend their meetings, social workers have
access to a number of tools for eliciting their views and, in almost all cases,
the clear recording of these views was apparent. There is good evidence
that parents and significant members of childrens families are consulted.
This includes absent fathers who have contact with children and/or hold
parental responsibility.


Addressing the needs of victims of domestic abuse is a clear priority for
Stockton-on-Tees, as prevalence is high. Within the early help service,
strong partnership working is having a direct and positive impact on children
and their families. A range of agencies and interventions are in evidence to
support victims and children. Operation Encompass3 has been operational
since January 2016. It has already led to the more timely and effective
management of domestic abuse notifications from police. This is resulting in
a more coordinated multi-agency response, which is beginning to reduce
risks for school-aged children. Effective arrangements are in place to
consider high-risk cases via multi-agency referral and assessment
conferences. Good multi-agency attendance at these meetings is providing a
clear focus on children and the management of risk.


Where children and young people need therapeutic support and
interventions, there are a wide range of multi-agency wrap-around services
to help them. These include support to help children affected by domestic
abuse, and children who have suffered sexual abuse, child sexual
exploitation and trauma. A range of services and effective packages of
support are available to meet a diverse range of parental needs. Appropriate


Operation Encompass is the implementation of key partnership working between Cleveland police,
local authorities and nominated key adults in schools. When domestic abuse cases occur, the police
share information with local schools to allow key adults the opportunity to engage with the child and
to provide access to support that allows them to remain in a safe but secure familiar learning
environment.


and timely referrals are made to childrens social care by adult services
when they identify children who are exposed to these risks.

When children and young people have suffered or are at risk of sexual
exploitation, they are well safeguarded. Cohesive Tees-wide strategic
partnerships bring together key agencies and organisations to ensure a
focus on the most vulnerable children and young people in Stockton-onTees. Close cross-boundary work with neighbouring authorities ensures that
information, intelligence, identification, and disruption and prevention
activities are well coordinated. This adds value and strength to the
safeguarding capacity of agencies in the borough via the strategic Tees-wide
vulnerable, exploited, missing and trafficked group (VEMT). The VEMT has
secured health funding to commission bespoke packages of support for
victims of child sexual exploitation, and a new research project is due to
commence in July 2016 that will focus on the needs of victims. This
demonstrates the proactive focus of the partnership on this vulnerable group
of children and young people.


Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation benefit from coordinated multiagency responses, robust risk assessments and well-informed individual
safety plans. Strategy meetings occur when concerns arise and escalation to
the operational sub-group of VEMT, known as the VEMT Practitioners Group
(VPG), ensures that effective multi-agency information is analysed to inform
wider strategic planning, which is leading to risk reduction. A wide range of
awareness-raising and preventative measures are operational and directed
at children, parents and carers, the wider community and the business
community. This includes licensed premises, hotels, public transport, retail
and leisure, and professionals who work directly with children and their
families.


Inspectors have seen evidence during case sampling of appropriate services
to protect and offer support to girls affected by female genital mutilation.
Clear policies and procedures are in place within childrens social care and
across the wider partnership. These are to ensure that professionals are
alert to potential victims and what action to take to safeguard girls who are
affected.


Comprehensive procedures based on effective collaboration between the
local authorities, agency partners, the police and the local community are in
place to identify individuals at risk of being drawn into terrorism. The
Channel arrangements are a key element of the local authoritys Prevent
strategy. Early help staff and services are suitably trained and resourced to
provide advice on the support that can be provided to safeguard those at risk
of radicalisation.


When children go missing from home, every episode is notified by police to
childrens social care. If the child is not known to childrens social care, early
help workers carry out return home interviews. If families decline the offered
appointment, they receive advice and support about services by telephone.
Young people are seen alone, where appropriate, and a range of services
are offered to the family, where needed. Although this service response is


good, unless the level of concern reaches the point where a child protection
enquiry is required, the information gathered from return home interviews is
not always analysed in full at the VPG. This is a missed opportunity to gather
intelligence to inform future safety planning and profiling of missing and
child sexual exploitation concerns. (Recommendation)

Persistent actions are taken to ensure that children and young people who
go missing from education are tracked and located. Strong links with
schools, regional and national local authorities, border control, police and
other key agencies help to keep the missing children register up to date and
to locate families quickly. The local authority keeps accurate and up-to-date
records on children and young people missing a full-time education.
However, not enough challenge is brought to bear on schools to ensure that
those on agreed part-time timetables are only on such timetables for very
short periods, as the Department for Educations guidance expects. Eighteen
young people have such timetables, and a significant minority have been on
them for longer than a term. Pupils absence rates are consistent with the
national picture at both primary and secondary level. Stringent action when
children do not regularly attend school led to 48 prosecutions last year.


Services and support for young people aged between 16 and 17 who
become homeless, or are at risk of homelessness, are very comprehensive.
There are excellent multi-agency arrangements, and a range of services are
offered to ensure that any vulnerable young person will be offered a holistic
assessment, appropriate accommodation and, if required and agreeable to
them, will become looked after by the local authority.


The number of private fostering cases are low, despite positive action taken
to raise awareness among partner agencies, the public and the councils
own staff. Inspectors reviewed all five of the current arrangements. In the
main, children are well supported, but social workers and managers are
unclear about the criteria for private fostering arrangements. As a result,
there are some delays in meeting the statutory responsibilities. For example,
there are delays in responding to notifications, police checks regarding
adults present in the home and the sign-off procedures. (Recommendation)


A dedicated officer provides robust management and overview of cases
where there are allegations about staff, carers or volunteers who work with
children across all sectors. Training and awareness-raising are a significant
part of the role, and are having a positive impact on the number of enquiries
and referrals from within social care and across the partnership.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Requires improvement

Summary
When children and young people need to be looked after, good placements meet
their immediate needs for care and protection. However, there is not enough
support for those who are on the edge of care to prevent them from becoming
looked after. High numbers of children looked after are placing increasing pressure
on the local authoritys ability to find good local placements. Effective action is being
taken to recruit new foster carers and develop new childrens homes within the
borough. Despite these challenges, wherever possible brothers and sisters are
placed together if this is in their best interests. Placement stability is good and there
is good use of staying put arrangements. There is no financial pressure to move
children from independent provision if the placement meets a childs needs, and
there are robust arrangements for safeguarding children and young people who are
placed outside of the borough.
When children need legal permanence, the care proceedings progress through court
in a timely way. However, permanence planning is not considered soon enough for
all children. There is a lack of understanding of the regulations which support family
and connected persons placements. Frontline managers do not always identify when
drift is occurring or when procedures are not followed. Not all care plans are
sufficiently outcome focused, and not all children are supported to understand their
life story in a timely way.
When children are identified for adoption, effective matching takes place and
placements are well supported. However, the recruitment of adopters is not
sufficiently targeted, as it is not informed by a written detailed analysis of need, and
the local authority does not yet have a foster to adopt policy.
Good arrangements are in place to maintain and improve the health and emotional
needs of children looked after. Strong, incisive leadership, and support and challenge
by the virtual headteacher to schools, are helping to drive improvement in pupils
achievements and attendance. Social workers listen to children and young people,
and act on their wishes and feelings. The participation of young people in service
design and review is strong.
The collective action of the services across the council that work with care leavers is
ensuring that they are well supported to develop the skills that they need to move
on to independence. Virtually all live in suitable accommodation and remain in
contact with services until they are at least 21. More care leavers move on to
education, employment or training than similar groups nationally, including the
proportion moving on to university. However, not enough care leavers have access
to apprenticeships.


Inspection findings

Currently, 398 children are being looked after by the local authority. The high
number of children looked after has been consistent for the past three years.
Prior to this inspection, senior leaders recognised that there are some gaps
in their approach that prevent children and young people becoming looked
after. Consequently, they are developing a range of proposals as part of their
transformation review. The proposals include creating a bespoke edge of
care family support service, developing more short-break services,
enhancing the existing family group conferencing service and developing
more restorative practice models. Inspectors were able to see some very
early evidence of edge of care support, but this is in its infancy and is not
yet having an impact on reducing the need for some children to become
looked after. (Recommendation)


When decisions are made for children to become looked after, these are
appropriate. However, not all permanence options are considered soon
enough for some children. Permanence planning is not always in evidence
by a childs four-month review. Concurrent planning is underdeveloped.
(Recommendation)


While placements within families are always considered as an alternative to
foster care or residential care, social workers and their managers lack
appropriate understanding of the regulations which support family and
connected persons placements. For some children, this means that they do
not become looked after when they should. These children do not acquire
the legal status which entitles them and their carers to support from the local
authority, and carers are not appropriately assessed. Children do, however,
receive support under Section 17 of the Children Act. This has resulted in
delay in some children securing permanence within their extended family
and close friendship networks. Consequently, the number of children leaving
care through special guardianship orders is low. During the inspection,
senior managers acted promptly to review all arrangements where children
are placed in family or friend placements, including those in private fostering
arrangements. (Recommendation)


When children require legal permanence, the cases progress through care
proceedings in a timely way. There are positive relationships between the
local authority, the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service
(Cafcass) and the local judiciary. The length of time to decide care
proceedings is timely, within 26 weeks. This is above the England average.
However, there is some weakness in the quality of the work undertaken in
the pre-proceedings stage of the process. Letters before proceedings are not
clear about what is required of parents to achieve positive change. There is
insufficient challenge by frontline managers and legal advisers when drift is
occurring and change is not being achieved within the childs timescale.
However, families are offered support and services during this period to
ensure that children are safeguarded. The judiciary report that, while most
proceedings progress in a timely way, the quality of some final evidence,
particularly in relation to final care plans, is not evidenced or argued well
enough. (Recommendation)



Where children and young people are looked after under voluntary
arrangements, these are reviewed regularly by senior managers in order to
avoid drift. When children are placed with their parents under a care order,
the order is appropriately supported, monitored and reviewed. Where it is
safe for children to return home, assessments are undertaken to ensure that
the risks which led to the child becoming looked after have been sufficiently
reduced, and that there is evidence of purposeful work to support and
monitor these arrangements. There are currently three unaccompanied
asylum-seeking young people looked after in Stockton-on-Tees. Their needs
are robustly assessed, in keeping with statutory guidance. Each young
person has received culturally sensitive support and appropriate responses
to their needs.


The work by the independent reviewing officers (IROs) is a strength. Their
caseloads have recently been reduced to a manageable level. The vast
majority (93.4%) of childrens and young peoples reviews are completed
within the required timescale. Children and young people benefit from good
relationships with their IRO and, wherever possible, they visit children and
young people in placement before their review. Consequently, the level of
childrens and young peoples engagement in their review is good. It is
acknowledged by IROs that visiting those children and young people who
are placed out of borough is a challenge. However, they have begun to
develop more creative measures to consult with children and young people,
and currently are piloting Skype and Facetime methods. This is not intended
to replace visiting placements.


While there is evidence that IROs do challenge social workers and
managers with regard to care planning, this does not always have the
desired impact. Frontline mangers are not always effective in ensuring that
plans are being progressed in a timely way. They do not always ensure that
social work records or care plans are of high enough quality. While positive
outcomes are achieved for most children and young people, this cannot
always be explicitly linked to their care plan. Many care plans are not
sufficiently focused on the outcome to be achieved, and contain too much
information about the childs history and experiences. A small number of
young people have told their IRO that they find the amount of information
that is contained within their plans upsetting and difficult to read. The DCS
has responded positively to this feedback and is currently reviewing the care
plan format. (Recommendation)


Social workers visit children and young people regularly, and engage them in
meaningful and constructive ways. Social workers and managers know
children well. The wishes and feelings of children and young people can be
seen in their assessments and plans, and their voices are heard clearly in
their reviews. There is good access to an independent visitor and advocacy
service. There is no waiting list, and those children and young people placed
out of the local authority area have equal access. While the advocacy
service is mainly used for wishes and feelings work, it has also enabled
young people to express their views without having to complain formally.
There is a very healthy culture promoted by senior managers and political


leaders to learn from the views of children and young people and to involve
them in shaping services. The Positive Activities Group for the under-12s,
the Lets Take Action group for the over-12s, and the Young Inspectors
group influence the local authoritys practice and ensure that changes are
made as a result. An example has been installing wi-fi in the councils own
childrens homes, increasing activities for adolescents at the supervised
contact centre, interviewing staff and purchasing bicycles for a childrens
home.

The participation and influence of children and young people in the
development of services are palpable. Their influence has helped to create a
variety of groups, for example offering a safe place for children and young
people to share stories, building skills and self-esteem, training young
people as mentors and developing support networks across the children
looked after and care leaver services. Celebrations events take place
throughout the year and are well attended by senior leaders, the DCS, the
chief executive officer (CEO), elected members, managers and staff across
childrens services. There is a corporate commitment to children looked
after. Children who are placed out of area are invited and supported to
attend. No child or young person is forgotten. Children and young people
report that they have good access to leisure facilities and activities. All
children, including those placed out of the borough, can access a corporate
fund to promote their social interests. Carers have delegated authority to
ensure that decisions regarding childrens access to recreation and leisure
activities are met in a timely way.


Children with complex needs benefit from a specialist social work team. Staff
are confident and skilled. A range of easy-to-read information is available to
signpost and inform families and professionals to where they can receive
services and support. When childrens care and support needs exceed 75
days, they become looked after, and receive sensitive and bespoke
responses to their identified needs. Young people who need to transition to
adult social care services are allocated a worker promptly. They receive an
assessment with individualised support to prepare for independence or
transfer to adult social care.


There are significant pressures on the local authority to meet its sufficiency
duty, as a result of the high numbers of children looked after. Consequently,
the children looked after strategy is being refreshed. Senior managers are
very knowledgeable about the types of placements needed for individual
children and where there are gaps in provision. All placement decisions are
scrutinised and challenged at scrutiny panel. All children requiring external
placements are referred to the childrens multi-agency placements panel,
chaired by the DCS. This gives the DCS contemporary knowledge of the
placement needs of individual children and where there are placement
pressures. However, currently there is no written strategic needs
assessment or demand analysis. Most placement commissioning is done on
an individual basis. The lack of a strategic needs analysis means that some
gaps in required provision go unnoticed, if they are not a regular occurrence.
For example, for some time there has been no provision in Stockton-on-Tees


for young people detained under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
(Recommendation)

The lack of a strategic needs analysis does not mean that placement
commissioning has stood still. Effective action has been taken to recruit new
foster carers and create new childrens homes within the borough. A
successful recruitment campaign has increased the number of in-house
foster carers, providing improved placement choice. The recent restructuring
within childrens services has increased the capacity of the child placement
team, enabling a better focus on support and training for foster carers.
Retention rates are good and there is a loyal foster care base. Foster carers
report that there is good communication with social workers and link
workers. As a result, they feel well supported and well informed. Foster
carers are appropriately assessed, and the records held meet the required
standard. Robust action is taken when allegations are made against foster
carers, and they are offered independent advice and support at these times.


There are robust arrangements in place to commission and monitor all
independent placements and secure settings. No child is placed in any
residential provision that is judged by Ofsted to be less than good. There has
been a 24% reduction in the number of independent fostering agency
placements required as a direct result of a successful foster care recruitment
campaign. A recent joint venture with a private company has begun to
reduce the number of external residential placements. This is an innovative
project which is still developing, resulting in three new childrens homes in
Stockton-on-Tees and another in the planning stage. There is also an off-site
education facility. There is no financial pressure to move children from
independent provision if the placement meets the childs needs. These
developments demonstrate the decisive action taken by the local authority to
provide good-quality local placement options for children and young people.


Placement stability is good at 69.4%, and is better than the national average.
The vast majority of children and young people are looked after in foster
care. An increasing number of young people (16) are remaining with foster
carers under staying put arrangements. Young people and carers value
these arrangements highly. There has been a slight reduction in the number
of children and young people being placed out of borough, which is positive
and demonstrates that the measures put in place to keep children near their
homes are working.


Family finding is undertaken nationally and locally. There are examples of
careful matching and introduction to carers when children have a planned
move into foster care or residential care. Talking books, pictures and play
dates are all used to ensure that younger children are well prepared. Where
appropriate, brothers and sisters are placed together to ensure that
attachments are maintained. Children are matched well to placements.
Foster carers receive additional training to ensure that they are well
equipped to meet the needs of the children placed with them. Wrap-around
support from dedicated children, adolescent, mental health service (CAMHS)
workers provides consultation and support to social workers and carers to
help them to understand childrens needs and the impact of their


experiences. While inspectors saw examples of some positive work
undertaken with individual children to prepare them for permanence, lifestory work is not completed in a timely way, overall. The vast majority of
children placed in permanent homes or those with a plan for permanence do
not have a sense of their history, their family or the reasons that they are
unable to return to their birth parents care. Some children have waited over
two years for this service. (Recommendation)

Children and young people who need supervised contact with their birth
families receive a good service. Contact is supported in a child-friendly
environment by trained contact staff in a bespoke contact centre. Where
community-based contact is needed, experienced staff manage these
arrangements based on thorough risk assessments and clear plans. Positive
action has been taken to reduce the number of children and young people
looked after who commit offences. Good work with residential providers and
foster carers on restorative practices, and also close links with the youth
offending team and community police officers, is ensuring that the needs of
children looked after and their additional vulnerabilities are known and
understood.


When children looked after are suffering or are at risk of exposure to child
sexual exploitation, the risk assessments are robust. Wrap-around protective
and therapeutic services ensure that children and young people are
safeguarded. Child protection procedures are undertaken as appropriate
and, where required, risk assessments are presented to the vulnerable
persons group. Here, individual safety planning for the child is discussed at a
multi-agency meeting, and information is shared to inform wider protection
and prevention strategies.


When children and young people go missing from their placement, they do
not always receive a return home interview, particularly those children and
young people living out of borough. Senior managers have recognised this
gap and are in the process of commissioning an independent provider to
deliver this service. Inspectors have reviewed the service proposal and
specification. While it meets this need, the current policies and procedures
do not ensure that information from all return home interviews will be
extrapolated and analysed. Consequently, this does not always inform
individual safety planning for children and young people, or wider strategic
analysis of possible links to child sexual exploitation. This is a gap.
(Recommendation)


Senior managers and political leaders have evidenced their aspiration to
improve the educational experience and outcomes for children looked after,
with identifiable impact. Support is tailored to their individual needs. Robust
leadership challenge and support by the virtual headteacher and the virtual
school team of school leaders are driving improvement in the achievement,
progress and attendance of children looked after. Gaps between children
looked after and other pupils are narrower than those found nationally for
similar groups. Outcomes in reading for children looked after at the end of
key stage 2 have been above those found nationally for similar groups for
the past two years. Results for writing and mathematics in 2015 dipped


slightly, but combined reading, writing and mathematics remained well above
average for this group. The proportion of key stage 4 children looked after
who gain five good GCSEs including English has been above that of similar
pupils for two of the past three years. In 2015, 20% of young people reached
this threshold, while only 12% did so nationally. Current tracking indicates
that 26% of young people will do so this year.

The progress that children looked after make from their starting points in the
early years is also above that found nationally. Currently, 70% are on track
to achieve their learning goals. This is a significant improvement on 33% last
year. A similar pattern of rapid improvement has been seen in key stage 1
this year. No children looked after are missing from school and none are
missing from education through permanent exclusion. A small number
(eight) have an alternative curriculum pathway designed to meet their
individual needs. Currently, five pupils attend the local authoritys pupil
referral unit (PRU). All but two children looked after have access to their 25
hours of school provision. Both of these pupils have complex needs, and one
is currently attending the PRU. These pupils are provided with additional
one-to-one support in their homes.


Concerted efforts are made to ensure that children looked after attend good
or better schools. At 83%, the proportion is broadly similar to that found for
all children in Stockton-on-Tees and nationally. Robust commissioning
arrangements and pre-placement checks ensure that children with complex
needs placed out of the borough are in good or better provision, and they are
achieving well. Checks have been made to ensure the suitability of provision.
Regular visits from the educational development adviser and key local
authority staff ensure that young people are safe and their needs are well
met, and that they are achieving well.


Good actions have been taken to ensure continuity of school placements for
children looked after when living arrangements break down or when they
become looked after. The proportion is reducing, year-on-year. Only 7%
have had more than one move this year as a result of a planned move to
specialist provision. Significant, successful work has been carried out with
schools to develop and implement personal education plans that meet
individual pupils needs, track their progress regularly, include measurable
targets for improvement and identify the impact of the use of the additional
government funding for looked after pupils, termed the pupil premium plus.
Rigorous monitoring of plans takes place to make sure that they are
conducted on time, are of a good quality and drive improvement. Where
there are concerns, action is required to be taken immediately. For example,
the virtual headteacher knows that improvements are required from some
out-of-borough schools. This is being tackled through the work of the
designated education development adviser.


Health outcomes for children looked after are good. Initial health assessment
completion rates are high, at 91.8%. Good commissioning arrangements
ensure that, where children have complex needs, the interventions, provision
and support are of high quality. The co-location of CAMHS workers in
permanence teams helps to ensure a timely and coordinated response to


children presenting emotional and mental health difficulties. Children looked
after wait no more than 24 hours for initial triage and no more than seven
days for access to treatment. Bespoke therapeutic services are available for
children experiencing trauma and abuse. There is good access to sexual
health services and advice, and more general issues which young people
need help to discuss and understand.

Good use is made of strengths and difficulties questionnaires. Completion
rates are high, and the information is used to support individual children and
young people, and to identify where there are gaps in service provision.
Where needs are identified, actions to develop services are progressed
within the children looked after health forum and the multi-agency looked
after partnership (MALAP) meetings. A range of commissioned substance
misuse and alcohol support services are available to engage children, young
people and their carers in education, support and treatment, where required.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it requires
improvement.

Adoption is not always considered at an early enough stage when it would
be appropriate for some children. There are some delays in progressing
plans once children become looked after. While parallel plans are
considered for most children, this is not always reducing delay in securing
early permanence. Some delays are incurred as the family-finding process
does not begin as soon as adoption becomes the plan following a statutory
review. The local authority does not make use of foster to adopt and
concurrent placements. (Recommendation)


The Department for Educations (DfEs) published figures for the year 2014
being placed with their adoptive family in Stockton-on-Tees was 556. This is
well above the national target of 487 days and above the England average of
average time children waited had lengthened to 675 days.


The latest-published DfE figures for 201215 for the number of days
between a local authority receiving the court authority to place a child and
the local authority deciding on a match to an adoptive family was 273 days,
against the target of 121 days. For the year 201415, the average time
waited was 270 days. In the local authoritys own data for 201516, this had
lengthened to 361 days. Only two of the 18 children adopted in the last 12
months took less than the 201516 target of 121 days. This means that
some children and young people have experienced long delays in securing
permanence through adoption.


Senior managers had already interrogated this data prior to the inspection,
and an action plan was in evidence but not yet having an impact. The local
authority produces a comprehensive monthly performance report that
provides both an overview and details of progress in relation to individual


children. There is good evidence from this information that every effort is
made to identify the best possible match for children. Where there are delays
in matching children to suitable adopters, there are good and appropriate
reasons. Social workers do not give up and will endeavour to match all
children, regardless of the complexity of their needs.

While performance scrutiny is good and every effort is made to find suitable
adopters, there is no detailed action plan alongside the overarching children
looked after strategy to inform adoption recruitment. The links between the
child placement team and the fieldwork teams are not effective enough.
Individual tracking tools used in the fieldwork teams to monitor the care
planning for children are not shared with the placement team until the
agency decision maker (ADM) agrees the adoption plan. This means that the
child placement team is not receiving the earliest possible notification of
those children who may require placements. The ADM is suitably qualified
and of appropriate experience and seniority within the local authority.
However, the ADM does not clearly record how they have considered and
taken account of all the information available to them, and not all ADM
decisions contain a clear rationale to support their decision.
(Recommendation)


The child placement team provides adoption and fostering services. The
service is stable, and the majority of staff and managers have considerable
experience in fostering and adoption. The local authority has invested in the
service by creating additional social worker posts to progress plans for
permanence in a more timely way. However, the recent increase in
connected persons assessments being referred has had a further impact on
the capacity of social workers, as these form part of their generic caseload
across fostering and adoption work. The impact of this investment, therefore,
is yet to be evidenced. Senior managers recognise that improvements are
required within the service. Senior managers had intended to separate the
service into dedicated fostering and adoption teams in the autumn of 2015
following a restructure. Plans were subsequently put on hold as a result of
the move towards regional/sub regional arrangements, with some temporary
management arrangements in place.


When children do have a plan of adoption, social workers try hard to involve
and consult children at all stages of the adoption process, ascertaining and
taking into account their views in a way which is sensitive to, and consistent
with, their age and understanding. Social workers in the permanence teams
undertake assessments of brothers and sisters being placed together. The
quality of those sampled by inspectors is not always good. Referrals are
made promptly to the agency medical adviser, who provides comprehensive
and timely health reports to the adoption panel. Life-story work is undertaken
with some children. However, the completion of life-story books and later-life
letters is delayed in the majority of cases and not available by the second
adoption review. (Recommendation)


Family finding for adoption is undertaken in the child placements team by the
supervising social worker for the childs foster carer. Foster carers spoken to
say that the social worker who supports them has knowledge of the children,


and that this facilitates more focused and appropriate family finding. There is
evidence of effective collaboration with voluntary adoption agencies,
attendance at bi-monthly family exchange meetings, and membership of
Adoption Link and the Adoption Register. In addition, social workers in the
placements team use adoption activity events including play dates to offer
the children and potential adopters informal opportunities to meet one
another. This has proved successful for several children, particularly older
children, who have waited for adoption.

There is an up-to-date statement of purpose for adoption, which provides
clarity for potential adopters about the process they will need to undertake. It
sets clear timescales in accordance with national minimum standards.


The length of time for adoption assessments is variable. The majority are
completed within 140 days and, in cases sampled where the assessment
took longer, the records evidence the appropriateness of that delay.
Adopters spoken to were all positive about the quality and promptness of
initial responses to adoption enquiries. They reported feeling valued,
respected and supported. They reported that the preparation training was
experienced by them as very effective, with the focus on the child being
particularly helpful. The assessment process is described by adopters as
intense and thorough. Adopters appreciate the consistency of having the
same social worker throughout, which supports building trusting
relationships.


The adoption panel is properly constituted and well managed. The chair has
an appropriate level of knowledge and expertise, and the minutes of the
panel evidence challenge and scrutiny of adoption plans and matches. The
panel chair provides a six-monthly report to senior managers that details the
performance, progress and outcomes of panel.


The average time from adopters making an application to Stockton-on-Tees
and having a placement made is 437 days. The local authority actively
promotes the adoption register, Adoption Matters and Adoption Link once
adopters are approved at panel, if it is unable immediately to identify a child
for matching. Examples were seen of adopters being matched with children
in other parts of England, and of children looked after by Stockton-on-Tees
placed with adopters approved by other agencies. The local authority is
tenacious in seeking adopters for older children, those with a disability and
those with complex emotional needs.


Once adoptive placements are made, these are appropriate for the majority
of children. There have been no adoption breakdowns in the past 12 months.
In 201415, there was just one adoption breakdown. At the time of the
inspection, 44 children were identified as having an adoption decision.
Seven children have had their decision reversed in the past 12 months. In
three cases, adopters could not be found for children with very complex
needs who subsequently remained with their foster carers. In four cases, the
court did not accept the local authoritys plan for adoption. Discussion with
the local judiciary found that the local authoritys legal advice is not robust
enough, in some cases, when adoption is put before the court as the


preferred option, and its evidence is not always well presented or backed up.
(Recommendation)

The adoption support plans seen were comprehensive and detailed. Postadoption support, including work with birth relatives, is good. This is provided
through a commissioned organisation. Requests for post-adoption support
are responded to promptly and, if more complex therapeutic needs are
identified which cannot be met through local services, applications are made
to the adoption support fund.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is outstanding.


The council and its partners aspire to go beyond statutory requirements to
support their care leavers. The determination that they have to do the best
for their young people can be seen in the impressive proportion of care
leavers with whom they keep in touch. Senior leaders have made a
conscious decision to ensure that every possible effort is made to maintain
meaningful contact with their young people, recognising the additional
vulnerability of this group. The local authority is in touch with all but one of
their 122 care leavers. This is well above that found nationally.


Care leavers develop trusting relationships with their personal advisers, who
provide them with thoughtful, individualised support or put them in touch with
the right people to help them. Relationships get off to a good start because
personal advisers co-work with young peoples social workers once they
reach the age of 16. Consequently, personal advisers have a good
understanding of young peoples strengths and needs. This information is
used well to support young people to develop the skills that they need to
move on to independence when they are ready to do so. Targeted work from
personal advisers, carers and staff in residential settings builds young
peoples skills in managing budgets, household work and cooking. The good
relationships engendered and the access to additional support build care
leavers confidence and emotional well-being effectively.


Senior leaders have high aspirations for their care leavers and strive to
enable their young people to achieve the best possible educational
outcomes. There is good evidence of timely, targeted, multi-agency work
from the care-leaving service. It works effectively with the virtual school,
transitions mentors, colleges and Youth Direction. This is a council-wide
integrated support service for children and young people that provides a
wide range of statutory, targeted, preventative and universal services,
including independent careers advice and guidance, the virtual school and
the youth offending team. This partnership has resulted in a higher than
average proportion of care leavers moving into education, employment and
training than nationally for similar young people. Careful tracking makes sure
that each young persons whereabouts and current situation are well known.


Rapid action is taken to help those at risk of becoming NEET (not in
education, employment or training).

The multi-agency looked after partnership (MALAP) for children looked after
and care leavers has a clear understanding of the strengths and areas for
improvement in services for care leavers. The care leavers team is held to
account for the improvement in the proportion of care leavers in education
and training through regular reports to senior managers and members.
Conversely, it also challenges senior managers on improvements needed
from services across the council. For example, it has reported that there are
too few care leavers with an apprenticeship, at just four in number. The
corporate management team accepted this and has recently developed a
council-wide vision for improvement.


Strong partnerships with local and regional universities ensure that taster
sessions, conferences and individual support encourage young people into a
university course that is right for them. Although at 11%, as nationally, the
proportion is below that for all young people, the proportion is greater than
that nationally for similar groups. Once on a course, young people are
supported well and in line with their individual preferences. Arrangements
are in place to ensure that those who wish to return to their chosen living
arrangements in the area at holiday times do so. Personal advisers make
sure that young people at university access the right level of funding, or
additional financial and other support, in times of need.


Care leavers spoken to by inspectors say that they feel safe and are
supported well to understand risks to their safety and well-being from risks
such as drugs, alcohol, social media and child sexual exploitation. Care
leavers spoke with passion about their personal advisers. One young person
told inspectors that their personal advisers were always on the case about
this sort of thing. They report that they receive regular advice and help to
stay healthy and live healthy lifestyles. All young people are registered with a
doctor and dentist, and have up-to-date health and dental assessments.
However, work to ensure that they move on to independence with a full
record of their medical history has been slow. Delays have been
exacerbated by technical issues in the health services data and information
process. A group of young people have already designed the health
passport folders and are awaiting the resolution of these problems.


Care leavers benefit from dedicated support from CAMHS, a clinical
psychologist and a leaving care nurse. CAMHS appointments are prioritised,
and care leavers are seen within a week. The leaving care nurse offers a
one-stop shop for contraception advice. She provides confidential,
personalised advice, as well as directing young people to other services,
such as drugs and alcohol services, counselling, therapeutic services and
the family nurse partnership. This service is provided to care-leaving
mothers up to their childs second birthday, and includes intensive health
visitor support for teenage mothers throughout their first pregnancy. Despite
this good work, not all pathway plans identify clearly enough how young
peoples health needs are being met.



Pathway plans have been refined by merging two documents into one.
However, leaders know that there is still some way to go to ensure that they
are a useful and effective plan for improvement. All pathway plans are
completed within the timescales required. Plans have some strengths,
generally contain a detailed analysis of young peoples needs and take into
account their views. Young people usually attend meetings to review their
plans, with IROs for those aged up to 18 and a dedicated care-leaving
service reviewing officer for those aged over 18. The tasks (actions)
identified are linked to the analysis of needs. However, they do not always
describe exactly what needs to be done or which tasks are a priority. There
is no section against which the impact of actions can be checked. Plans do
not always identify the diverse range of direct work that actually takes place
with young people. (Recommendation)


Strong partnership working ensures that virtually all care leavers move on to
suitable accommodation of their choice, and when they are ready to do so.
At 93%, this is well above that found nationally. Young Inspectors review all
semi-independent accommodation to check that it is of a suitable standard
and somewhere that they would like to live. They ensure that the corporate
management team takes decisive action to tackle any areas identified to be
in need of improvement. Accommodation and living needs are addressed
well, because of the effective youth accommodation panel and services that
tackle young peoples needs holistically and ensure that the right support is
put in place. Close links between the care-leaving service and the transitions
worker for children with disabilities ensure that these young people have a
good understanding of their entitlements from the service and the additional
support available. Liaison with adult workers when young people are moving
on from care helps to smooth transitions into their adult arrangements
effectively.


Care leavers are encouraged to remain in supported placements beyond the
age of 18, and an increasing proportion do so. The number of staying put
arrangements, whereby those aged 18 or over can remain with their carers
until they are ready to move on, have doubled from eight to 16 in the past
two years. Young people value this support, and the increasing range of
transitional flats and supported living arrangements, which provide an
effective transition into independence. One young person spoke movingly of
how his life has been turned around due to the dedicated support and care
provided by the team in his semi-independent accommodation. Young
people also report how they value the work of the dedicated weekend
support worker, who offers practical and emotional support over the
weekend. One young person is in bed and breakfast accommodation, but
this is the first time that this has happened for many years and is the young
persons choice despite considerable efforts by staff to provide more
appropriate accommodation.


The care-leaving service ensures that young people have a good
understanding of their entitlements. Care leavers report that they know how
to complain when they have concerns, and are actively encouraged to do so.
The Lets Take Action group, part of the Children in Care Council, works


closely with senior leaders to make sure that they understand young
peoples views and take action when concerns or suggestions are made. For
example, the councils leaving care exit survey identified that a few young
people felt that they were not prepared well for independence. As a result, a
programme of courses has been developed to focus on the range of
independence skills that are needed. Lets Take Action has developed an
updated 21st century pledge for children in care. It includes a simple and
clear emoji version and a poster that is clear about the councils pledges.


Great attention is paid to celebrating the achievements of care leavers.
Alongside the annual high-profile celebration evening and the young person
of the year shield, there are many examples. These include individual letters
of congratulation from the DCS and staff who work with young people,
attendance at special events and shows, and presents at birthdays and
significant celebration events.

Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Political and professional leaders demonstrate determination and a commitment to
keep children and young people safe in Stockton-on-Tees, with some examples of
outstanding practice. There is a highly effective multi-agency approach to
safeguarding and managing risk across the partnership. Clear governance
arrangements ensure that leaders discharge their collective responsibilities well.
The DCS provides strong and effective leadership, and lines of accountability are
clear. Strategic planning is highly effective and responsive to the complex and
diverse needs of children, young people and their families. Prioritisation is based
on a very accurate understanding of what is working well and what needs to
improve. The senior leadership team is therefore focusing on the right things.
There are strong and effective links between the local authority and voluntary and
community sector organisations. The DCS takes a fundamental role in the strategic
developments, both within Stockton-on-Tees and across wider Teesside
partnerships, and has been instrumental in commissioning thematic reviews of
social work practice within the Stockton-on-Tees Local Safeguarding Children
Board (SLSCB). Collaborative working through the SLSCB and joint commissioning
of services has strengthened partnerships. Agencies work effectively together in
response to agreed priorities, with the aim of developing and improving services to
children.
Children are at the heart of service delivery in Stockton-on-Tees. The extent to
which all leaders and elected members engage with children and young people is
outstanding. Children and young people are actively involved in developing
services across the partnership, and are extensively engaged through the MALAP.
Leadership across the local authority is highly visible and accessible. There is a
strong focus on performance management that continually drives improvement in
services, ensuring that leaders and managers at all levels have an accurate
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the service. There is a
comprehensive quality assurance programme, including regular and themed audits.
Senior managers have taken effective action to address the challenges in
identifying a sufficient number of local placements for children looked after.
However, they do not have a strategic needs assessment to inform placement
commissioning. While they have begun to develop some edge of care services,
not enough preventive action has been taken to support children and families so
that fewer children become looked after, or to improve the numbers of children
who cease to be looked after through adoption.
Workforce planning is highly effective. Supervision is taking place regularly and
there is evidence of management oversight, but it is not yet focusing sufficiently
on the quality of social work practice. Senior managers have responded effectively
to challenges in respect of social work recruitment and retention, developing a
comprehensive workforce strategy. The children and young peoples select
committee is effective in scrutinising services for children through a programme of
detailed briefings, performance management information, visits to frontline
services, and engagement with children and young people.


Inspection findings

The DCS has set solid foundations from which to improve practice and
outcomes for children in Stockton-on-Tees, supported by the CEO, elected
members and the senior management team. There is a strong culture of
openness and a focus on achieving improvement. During the inspection,
senior managers fully embraced the concept of improvement through
inspection. They used the process to its best advantage by responding
swiftly and positively to emerging inspection findings.


Strategic priorities are translated well into strategic planning and promote a
partnership approach to safeguarding children and young people. Strategic
plans are explicit in setting clear objectives to improve services, and
performance targets are increasingly ambitious. There is a very good track
record of sustained improvement. Extensive restructuring took place across
the local authority in 2015, resulting in increased investment in childrens
services to address identified capacity issues. In April 2016, the changes
brought about to deliver transformation under the local authoritys Big
Picture programme resulted in a director of adults services role, in addition
to the DCS. This appointment has provided additional capacity for the DCS
to drive key improvements, including the DCS role itself, in leading a range
of strategic developments within Stockton-on-Tees and across wider
Teesside partnerships. The DCS has also been instrumental in leading the
development of the multi-agency childrens hub, in collaboration with
Hartlepool. This went live on 1 June 2016. Its aim is to strengthen the
understanding of thresholds across partner agencies, and to ensure a
coordinated and well-informed response to children and families in need of
support.


Senior managers, leaders and elected members discharge their individual
and collective responsibilities well. Arrangements between elected members,
senior leaders and strategic groups responsible for developing services for
vulnerable children, including the SLSCB and the Health and Wellbeing
Board (HWB) are clear, well understood and applied. The CEO, DCS and
lead member of the council meet regularly. These successful partnerships
provide a shared focus on how well children and young people are helped,
cared for and protected in Stockton-on-Tees.


Elected members have a good understanding of the priorities for childrens
services. The lead member is instrumental in ensuring that childrens issues
are a high priority across the local authority, and is visible across many
forums, including cabinet and scrutiny. Elected members make it their
business to know what is happening for children through detailed briefings,
performance information and visits to frontline services. They proactively
seek to ensure that children are receiving the right support, engaging with
children and young people through various forums and championing their
interests.


The children and young peoples select committee undertakes extensive
work to scrutinise frontline practice. During the last year, the committee
scrutinised services provided by all childrens homes in the borough, meeting


with childrens homes managers and reviewing inspection outcomes. It has
carried out an extensive review to ensure that arrangements to respond to
child sexual exploitation and missing children are effective. Members are
delivering a rolling programme of site visits to the frontline services, and the
committee meets formally with children looked after. This work strengthens
members understanding of frontline practice, and how children and young
people experience the services and support that they receive.

The commitment to children is evident across every layer of the local
authority. The local authority has made a strategic promise that not one child
in the borough will be knowingly let down or forgotten. Young people are
actively involved in developing services across the partnership through their
engagement in the Stockton-on-Tees youth assembly. Young people have
helped to shape services, including the health needs assessment, a sports
and leisure programme and the design of the local authority website.


The local authority knows itself well. Its self-assessment reflected almost all
of the inspection findings. The local authority is a learning organisation that
seeks to strengthen self-awareness through external scrutiny, peer
challenge and external audits. This open, reflective approach ensures that
strategic planning informs a concrete understanding of the real issues
affecting childrens lives. Internal scrutiny of practice, including peer auditing,
complaints and performance analysis, further facilitates self-awareness, and
consequently an improvement in social work practice and outcomes for
children and young people. Strategic priorities are aligned and informed by
the Tees Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA). Some of the analysis is
not up to date but, in response to a recent local government association
review of the HWB, actions are in hand to review this.


Key strategic bodies, such as the HWB and the childrens and young
peoples partnership, focus well on progressing significant strategic areas of
development for children. Work programmes are aligned, lines of
accountability are transparent and networking is effective, with little
duplication. The local authority and partners have a comprehensive
understanding of the needs of children and families, and are delivering a
wide range of quality and appropriate services to respond to the diverse
needs of this population. The CEO and lead member are both active and
influential participating observers of the SLSCB. Relationships between the
local authority, Cafcass and the courts are constructive, with regular informal
and formal meetings, and engagement through the Local Family Justice
Board.


Partnerships are strong, including the interface with the SLSCB which is
supported by rigorous governance arrangements facilitated by the DCS and
senior management team. Prior to the inspection, the local authority had
identified that it had further work to do to enhance other partnership working,
including securing better attendance by police in strategy meetings,
strengthening partner agencies understanding of thresholds, and ensuring
that early help is used effectively by partner agencies to prevent escalation
of need. (Recommendation)



Commissioning arrangements within the childrens and young peoples joint
commissioning group are robust and well informed. The group draws on the
JSNA and local sources of data to inform commissioning decisions. The local
authority commissioning function transferred to public health in 2015 as part
of the local authority-wide restructure. Monthly and quarterly performance
meetings focus clearly on monitoring the effectiveness of commissioned
contracts.


Commissioners have effective relationships with all providers, including
private, voluntary and public sector providers. Consequently, children and
young people are receiving good levels of support from locally
commissioned services. Domestic abuse services, and services to support
children who have experienced child sexual abuse and sexual exploitation,
provide effective support and interventions. A range of procurement and
other commissioning mechanisms are used to secure a good range of
services for children looked after. For example, a review of the CAMHS
contract has resulted in improvements in the continuity of support to children
looked after and care leavers, and integrated multi-disciplinary support to
families in need of early help.


There is a comprehensive quality assurance programme, driven by an
overarching audit plan. A well-embedded audit process informs practice
improvement. Random and themed case audits are undertaken monthly, and
are subject to moderation and scrutiny to ensure consistency. Monitoring of
audit outcomes ensures that actions are progressed. As a result, senior
managers have identified areas of practice that needed strengthening over
the last year, including the quality of chronologies, case recording,
supervision and care plans. A range of actions were implemented to address
identified weaknesses, such as improved performance monitoring, amended
guidance and templates, and targeted training. Audit findings are shared at
monthly performance clinics and team health checks, as well as with the
SLSCB, to ensure that learning is considered. Although this is a
comprehensive process, during case sampling the inspectors did not always
agree with some managers audits of the quality of practice. This
demonstrates that not all managers are clear and consistent in respect of
their understanding of what good practice looks like. (Recommendation)


Performance management is well established and systematic. The children
and young peoples select committee, cabinet and the corporate parenting
board regularly scrutinise data and consider progress against priorities. A
comprehensive performance framework, performance reporting and live
datasets monitor compliance and track progress. Managers have access to
a broad range of performance information, including live trackers that
provide increased scrutiny of specific areas of practice, such as chronologies
and supervision. Monthly performance clinics and the newly developed team
health checks ensure that performance is considered in the round, drawing
on qualitative information such as audit feedback and complaints. However,
there is further work to do to strengthen the performance framework. There
is no evaluation of independent reviewing officer escalations to consider
themes, and there needs to be greater focus on the qualitative aspects of


supervision, including its effectiveness in driving childrens plans.
(Recommendation)

Staff supervision is taking place and there is evidence of management
oversight, but it is neither sufficiently reflective nor consistently effective in
progressing all childrens plans or actions required. Senior managers had
taken action prior to the inspection to tackle identified weaknesses regarding
the consistency of supervision and management oversight. This resulted in
improvements in the regularity of supervision, but there is more to do to
strengthen the quality and the effectiveness of management oversight.
(Recommendation)


Historically, the workforce has been extremely stable, but over the last year
there has been an increase in vacancies. This has led to pressures in
allocating cases, as well as social workers struggling to deliver work to the
required standards within timescales. Senior managers have responded
rigorously and swiftly to this changing picture, appointing agency social
workers to fill gaps, strengthening recruitment and retention strategies, and
increasing financial investment. The caseload management system
introduced some time ago has helped to ensure that caseloads are set at
manageable levels. This approach is beginning to evidence impact, with all
but two social work vacancies filled at the time of the inspection and
additional agency staff appointed above capacity where needed.


Employee and social work surveys indicate high levels of satisfaction across
the workforce. Social workers are positive about working for Stockton-onTees. They feel well supported, and find that managers at all levels are
visible and available. They feel heard and that their ideas shape service
delivery, both through individual consultation and collectively through the
social work board. Some social workers told inspectors how the recruitment
and retention strategy and caseload management system had made a
difference to their workloads and made them feel valued.


Political and professional leaders take their corporate parenting roles
seriously, scrutinising service delivery to ensure that they are meeting the
needs of children looked after and care leavers. Despite the extent of this
scrutiny, a number of weaknesses in the service provided to children looked
after have not been given sufficient focus. Plans for permanence are not
always considered early enough. This is exacerbated by delays for some
children, because managers have not understood and interpreted correctly
the guidance and regulations on placements with connected persons or
family members. For some children, there is a lack of timely work to prepare
them to understand their life history. (Recommendation)


Despite robust commissioning arrangements, the local authority faces
considerable challenges to provide sufficient accommodation within
Stockton-on-Tees to meet the needs of the children whom they are looking
after. There are insufficient in-house foster placements. Senior managers
have taken action to respond to this, engaging with independent fostering
agencies to ensure competitive contracts, as well as strengthening foster
carer recruitment. The local authority has also taken positive action to


respond to shortfalls in the availability of local residential provision, building
its own capacity by tendering for a joint venture partnership. This has
resulted in the commissioning of three new local childrens homes to enable
children to be placed closer to their homes. The resource team undertakes
monitoring visits to children in all external residential placements. These are
an added assurance that children are effectively safeguarded.

While good-quality placements are found, this is still not sufficient to meet
demand. Most placements are commissioned on a spot purchasing basis.
Although senior managers have a good understanding of future placement
needs, they do not have a written strategic needs analysis to inform
placement commissioning. There is also a lack of a preventive and early
intervention service to reduce the need for children becoming looked after.
Senior leaders recognised some of these gaps prior to the inspection.
Consequently, they are developing a range of proposals as part of the
transformation review. While inspectors were able to see some very early
evidence of edge of care support being developed, it is too early to
demonstrate any impact. (Recommendation)


The MALAP provides a strong focus on improving outcomes and
achievements for children looked after and care leavers. The membership
comprises of key managers who provide support to these groups of children
and young people. The panel has a good understanding of the needs of
children looked after and care leavers, and the collective work that it and its
teams do to support them. This information is checked and updated
regularly, and is used to determine swift action when concerns are raised.
This collective action is contributing to improving outcomes for children
looked after and care leavers.


The local authority has invested in training for a number of young people to
undertake the role of Young Inspectors to inspect the quality of childrens
homes, semi-independent accommodation and other services, making
recommendations in response to any identified shortfalls.


Children and young people looked after are enthusiastic members of
Stockton-on-Tees Children in Care Council (CiCC) the Lets Take Action
group for children aged 12 to 21 and the Positive Activities Group for
children aged five to 12. These groups influence the agenda of the multiagency children looked after panel and shape service delivery. There are
many good examples of how childrens and young peoples views shape
service delivery. For example, wi-fi was installed in childrens homes in
response to young peoples requests after visits by members, and the survey
of care leavers resulted in a new independent living programme, attached to
residential homes, being commissioned.


The groups are well supported by the childrens rights officer and have
influenced a variety of service developments. These include developing a
training DVD on family contact for social workers and foster carers, and
developing guides for young people on attending child protection
conferences, as well as a range of other actions. The local authority is also


involved in the Inspiring voices project, working with other local authorities
to increase the membership and reach of the CiCC.

Children and young people from the two CiCC groups designed and created
the children looked after pledge. It is written in young person-friendly
language and is currently being further developed by young people into an
emoji pledge, with the use of emoji symbols. This provides a simple
message that the local authority will help things to get better when they are
not going well. The childrens rights officer visits children in external
placements, and offers young people an opportunity to be seen alone and to
feed back any worries or concerns.


Despite the positive work undertaken to ensure wide participation, services
to children looked after are underdeveloped, and there is more work to do to
ensure that children receive a consistent and timely response. Services
provided to care leavers are strong, but there is more to do to realise the
local authoritys ambition to increase the proportion of care leavers benefiting
from apprenticeships that lead to employment.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement
Executive summary
The board has very good understanding of its strengths and weaknesses. SLSCB
meets its statutory functions. It benefits from appropriate multi-agency membership,
very good attendance and strong commitment, including from three lay members
who bring independent challenge to the boards work. However, the board has
lacked thoroughness in aspects of challenge and analyses of some key areas of its
purpose. It does not yet have clear mechanisms for analysing, evaluating and
collating how partner agencies are ensuring the effectiveness of their practice in
respect of some key safeguarding practice. Performance information has been too
focused on data and not on the underlying explanations of why performance is good
or poor.
Insufficient action has been taken to ensure that thresholds are understood across
partner agencies. Furthermore, the 201617 joint Stockton-on-Tees and Hartlepool
training programme has been introduced without a full needs analysis, despite
under-participation on some courses in 201516.
Although the board has commissioned work on the influence and voice of the child,
it has yet to ensure that this is embedded in the work of the board and across all
partner agencies.
A key strength of SLSCB is the work of the sub-groups, especially those working
across other Teesside local safeguarding children boards, including the vulnerable,
exploited, missing and trafficked group (VEMT), which adds strength and challenge
to safeguarding children, the shared procedures sub-group and the child death
overview panel (CDOP).
The board has been instrumental in shaping services for children and young people
in Stockton-on-Tees, including those for domestic abuse and promoting the safety of
children in public settings, and has been influential in the introduction of the multiagency childrens hub.
The annual report 201415 lacks rigour. While it includes a great deal of
information, it is too lengthy, and does not include sufficient assessment and
analysis of performance and effectiveness.


Recommendations

Ensure that quality assurance and performance management processes
provide clear analyses, so that the SLSCB has a clear understanding of the
effectiveness of partner agencies.


Ensure that the joint Hartlepool and Stockton-on-Tees threshold document is
effectively used and understood by partner agencies.


Ensure that the views of children and young people help to influence the
work of the board and the safeguarding practice of all partner agencies.


Undertake an analysis and evaluation of need to inform the Stockton-onTees and Hartlepool 201718 joint training programme.


Ensure that the annual report for 201516 is succinct, and includes a clear
analysis of performance and the effectiveness of partner agencies in
undertaking their safeguarding functions.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The board is constituted in line with statutory guidance. Members of the
board are committed to promoting the multi-agency shared priorities.
Attendance of board members at the monthly meetings is consistent, and
this helps to ensure that vital issues are disseminated to partner agencies.
The board has three lay members, who provide an independent perspective
and challenge. There is a good range of sub-groups to consider and
progress strategic areas of safeguarding practice. The sub-groups are well
established and attended, and report regularly to the full board on
performance, the VEMT, learning and improvement, training, licensing and
procedures.


There are strong governance arrangements across childrens services and
key partnerships boards, including the HWB, children and young peoples
partnership board and Safer Stockton group. These ensure that the priorities
of the SLSCB link to those of these important boards and the overarching
priorities of the JSNA. However, the independent chair of the board has
identified that the SLSCB business plan and priorities could be better aligned
to the JSNA and HWB priorities.


The independent chair of SLSCB was appointed in April 2016. He is also the
independent chair of a neighbouring LSCB and has a very good
understanding of his role. The independent chair demonstrates openness
and honesty in identifying positive practice of the board, areas for
improvement and, importantly, how areas for improvement will be
addressed. He is also keen to ensure that the work of the SLSCB is
determined by all the representative agencies. Prior to his appointment,
SLSCB already had well-established working arrangements. These have
been developed further, and the momentum of the board has been
intensified by new membership and changes to how meetings are organised,


which are enhancing the quality of discussions and challenge. The board is
well-resourced with an appropriate budget, and benefits from a full-time,
experienced, board manager who has good administrative support.

In 201415, only four multi-agency audits were undertaken. Consequently,
the board did not have a comprehensive overview of the effectiveness of
partners in important areas of safeguarding practice. The board recognises
this weakness and, to compensate, in 201516 a range of thematic reviews
were commissioned and reported to the board. These focused on the quality
of frontline practice, including child protection plans, casework, initial child
protection conference attendance, section 47 enquiries and conference
decision-making. These findings, along with learning from serious case
reviews and serious incidents, have resulted in an agreed programme of
multi-agency auditing for 201617. The programme will focus on issues of
domestic violence, alcohol and substance misuse, and adult mental health,
as these remain significant drivers of the workload in early help and social
care, and for all agencies.


Other routine reports to the board are provided in respect of private
fostering, the designated officer, youth offending, children missing education,
children home educated, the work of independent reviewing officers, children
living out of the local authority area, children looked after (including care
leavers), children missing and the work of the VEMT. The board has a rich
source of information from these reports, and there is evidence of board
members challenging each others practice and taking forward the findings to
their individual agencies. However, the inspection findings and performance
data that were seen indicate that further work is needed to ensure
improvements, especially in relation to the quality of care plans, attendance
and contributions to reviews, and consistent application of thresholds
guidance. Importantly, there is no clear mechanism for the board to monitor
and collate information on the effectiveness of all partners in improving these
key areas of practice. (Recommendation)


The joint Hartlepool and Stockton-on-Tees threshold document Providing
the right support to meet a childs needs in Hartlepool and Stockton,
launched in February 2016, preceded the introduction of the multi-agency
childrens hub in June 2016. It was anticipated that the new threshold
guidance would result in improved application of thresholds by partners.
However, too little emphasis has been given to the launch to ensure that all
partner agencies have an appropriate understanding of the thresholds when
making referrals to childrens social care. There is no mechanism for the
board to assess how effective agencies have been in the application of the
new guidance. (Recommendation)


The current performance dataset consists mainly of childrens social care
measures, with some information from health and housing partners, and
does not include any data in relation to other partner agencies. The dataset
includes some benchmarking criteria, but there is no commentary to interpret
the data. The limitations of this performance information are acknowledged,
and the sub-group recognises a need to include commentary about the data
information to gain a clear understanding of the issues underlying


performance. This has the potential to facilitate a more coordinated and
effective approach by agencies, for example in understanding thresholds
and consequently ensuring that referrals are made appropriately. This
approach is intended to link closely to the new performance framework
which is being introduced across Teesside.

The four Teesside local safeguarding children boards (Hartlepool, Stocktonon-Tees, Middlesbrough, and Redcar and Cleveland) have jointly secured
funding from the Department for Education to design and implement a single
multi-agency performance management framework and dataset. The
ambition is to strengthen performance monitoring and promote better
outcomes for children and young people. This is through improved
monitoring and accountability of partners to the boards, improved decisionmaking and prioritisation, efficiency savings and consistency in the type of
information collected. However, this framework is new and it is too soon to
see any effect.


Effective arrangements are in place through the CDOP, which operates
across the four Teesside local authorities. The Teesside approach ensures
rationalisation of attendance and consistent feedback to individual agencies.
In 201516, all reviews were undertaken within timescales. The CDOP panel
includes a lay representative, which enhances challenge. The panel also
benefits from attendance by three paediatric consultants. In 201516, only
three of 12 child deaths in Stockton-on-Tees were unexpected. There are no
specific themes arising from a review of recent childrens cases, but the
panel is proactive in taking forward learning and in challenging agencies. In
practice, including improved communication with the coroner, policy changes
in respect of instances of retention of placenta and coordinated work in
respect of juvenile Huntingdons disease. CDOP has also secured funding
and reintroduced the rapid response team, which had been suspended in


The overall analysis from the most recent section 11 audits demonstrates
that Stockton-on-Tees partner agencies have a high commitment and
application to their responsibilities, outlined in Working together to safeguard
children 2015. The standards are being met, in the main, and where
agencies have identified that there is room for improvement, the deficiencies
are included in their action plans. The rigour of section 11 audits has been
enhanced by the establishment of face-to-face peer challenge of audit
findings to ensure consistency and fairness in auditing.


The SLSCB learning and improvement framework defines and provides the
basis for the work of the learning and improvement sub-group. This includes
the processes for undertaking serious case reviews (SCRs) and learning
reviews of significant incidents. There have been two SCRs published in the
past two years, and a further two childrens cases are currently being
considered to ascertain whether they meet the criteria for a SCR. Learning
from SCRs and serious incidents is cascaded effectively through specific
training and briefings. Briefings are sent out to staff, and learning events are
held where participants are asked to identify the key learning points for their


practice. Training course content is reviewed and changes are made to
procedures to reflect learning. Learning from SCRs and reviews has resulted
in better awareness and understanding, as well as changes to practice and
procedures such as not brought to appointments, disguised compliance,
professional challenge and chronic neglect. The majority of social workers
seen by inspectors had a good understanding of the most recently published
serious case reviews and awareness of the role of the SLSCB.

The procedures sub-group is a Teesside group. It produces and updates
procedures, and maintains and updates the SLSCB website. The Teesside
approach is good at ensuring consistency of practice, especially where
partner agencies operate across the different authorities. A task and finish
group reviewed the requirements from Working together to safeguard
children 2015 and has ensured that all procedures are up to date. A further
area of good practice is the expectation that every procedure brought to the
board for consideration must include a voice of the child impact
assessment. Policies that have recently been updated include those on
allegations management, dual process (child protection and children looked
after), female genital mutilation, information sharing, complaints and seeking
information from the police. Consideration for changes to procedures come
from national guidance and legislation, as well as learning from SCRs,
incidents and local issues.


The Teesside strategic VEMT sub-group is successful in providing a strong,
strategic Teesside partnership to bring together key agencies and
organisations to ensure a focus on the most vulnerable children and young
people in Stockton-on-Tees. The close cross-boundary working with
neighbouring authorities ensures that information, intelligence, identification,
disruption and prevention activities are coordinated well, adding value and
strength to the safeguarding capacity of agencies in the borough. Each of
the four Tees boroughs has a sub-group which sits beneath the VEMT,
working to the overarching Teesside strategy. Each sub-group has an
individual action plan working to the four Ps: prevent, pursue, protect and
prosecute.


The independent chair acknowledges that further work is required to ensure
that the voice of the child is embedded throughout the SLSCB and within
partner agencies. A recently commissioned consultation of children and
young people has resulted in some very positive work within childrens
services and, consequently, the SLSCB has prioritised the need for further
work to embed an approach to the voice of the child in its work. This is
through a framework which includes expectations for all partner agencies at
strategic, operational and individual levels. As part of this work, the
independent chair is keen to involve the Stockton-on-Tees Young
Inspectors in the work of the board. This is to improve communication and to
ensure that childrens and young peoples views inform partner agencies
practice. (Recommendation)


The SLSCBs influence is clearly seen in the commissioning of services, and
the development of policies and procedures to safeguard children. The
board has been involved in the introduction of Operation Encompass,


providing early reporting by the police to schools and colleges on any
domestic abuse incidents that may have an impact on a child and enabling
staff to provide support where needed. The board has also been
instrumental in developing A safer place for children guidance, promoting
the safety of children in public settings. In addition, the board has been
influential in developing the social work model of risk assessment being
rolled out across childrens services and in early help settings. This is to
assess and respond more effectively to cases of neglect. These areas of
practice are already reported by partners as having an impact and leading to
enhanced outcomes for children. Most significantly, the board has been
pivotal in the introduction of the Stockton-on-Tees and Hartlepool childrens
hub in June 2016.

The Hartlepool and Stockton-on-Tees Local Safeguarding Children Boards
training programme for 201617 aims to improve communication and
information sharing between professionals, including a common
understanding of key terms, definitions and thresholds for action. The
programme offers a wide range of courses, including online training. The
impact of training is measured by distributing evaluation forms to all
delegates at the completion of the training. A subsequent evaluation
questionnaire is sent out three months later to gather information on the
impact of the knowledge acquired. The evaluation concludes that training in
in dealing with safeguarding matters. However, there has been insufficient
analysis of why the take-up of training has been low in some agencies and
why there has been a 25% under-participation on some training courses.
Consequently, the SLSCB cannot be assured that the current training
programme is based upon an accurate needs analysis. (Recommendation)


The annual report 201415 includes a great amount of detail on the actions
and work programme of the board during that period. However, the report is
lengthy and lacks a clear analysis of the effectiveness of the board and
partners in fulfilling their responsibilities to safeguard and promote the
welfare of children in the local area, and in relation to the boards work.
(Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Deputy lead inspector: Donna Marriott
Team inspectors: Rachel Holden, Cath McEvoy, Fiona Millns, Alison Smaile, Claire
Humerstone, Margaret Farrow. Shadow inspector: Anne-Marie Born
Senior data analyst: Peter McLaughlin
Quality assurance manager: Bob Morton


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners
of all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children
and Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
further education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and
other secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children
looked after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016


