Suffolk County Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 23 November 2015  17 December 2015
Report published: 11 February 2016

Childrens services in Suffolk County Council are good.

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Requires improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Suffolk County Council is led by dynamic and capable leaders and managers and is
delivering a good service overall to children and their families. Leaders have a
comprehensive understanding of what needs to be achieved and have made
sustained progress since the inspections of services for children looked after in 2010
and child protection in 2013, which were both judged to be adequate. Services for
children looked after are particularly strong for younger children and in securing
permanence, with some aspects showing outstanding performance.
Services for children in need of help and protection require improvement. While
some aspects of these services have considerable strengths and many have
improved, outcomes are not consistently good. Improvement is required to ensure
that children in need and children on a child protection plan benefit from consistently
good assessment and planning, and that this is evident in case records. Services for
care leavers require improvement to ensure that they are all in suitable and stable
accommodation and have clear plans for their futures. The majority of actions from
previous inspections have been addressed or are in progress. Senior managers are
aware of the areas where progress still needs to be made and they are working
rigorously to ensure consistency across all services for children.
Very clear governance arrangements are in place and the senior leadership team has
been successful in engaging partners to drive continued improvement. The Chief
Executive ensures that services for children have a high profile within the council and
she is ambitious for children and their achievements. There is a clear and committed
understanding of corporate parenting and the Lead Member is well engaged and
very active in planning for and consulting with children. A determined and
aspirational Director of Childrens Services has been ambitious in her drive to
transform services for children and families and has, along with her equally
determined senior management team, planned for large-scale and long-term change.
They are well on their way to achieving this.
Children and their families in Suffolk receive a timely and comprehensive early help
service. Assessments are undertaken promptly and children receive a service that
suits their needs. There is a clear process to monitor step-up and step-down
arrangements when risks change, and in cases seen by inspectors, children received
the right level of support. For children who require protection, action is taken
promptly and risk is well understood. The majority of children are safeguarded well.
However, the quality of assessment and the planning for children in need and in
need of protection are not yet consistently good for all children. These require
improvement to ensure that targets and timescales are clear and that progress is
made for all children. While inspectors did not see a detrimental impact on childrens
well-being, written plans, assessments and records do not clearly demonstrate the
work that is being undertaken, or how and why decisions are made.
The local authority is appropriately identifying those children who are at risk of child
sexual exploitation and has developed strong cooperative working relationships with
the police to maintain a clear strategic overview. Effective oversight is provided


through clear, multi-agency meetings and an appropriate and flexible range of
support services is in place. The offer, timeliness and recording of return home
interviews for children who go missing from home require improvement to ensure
consistency and a full understanding of risks for each young person. The intelligence
available from all return interviews is not being used to full effect. Senior managers
are aware of this and appropriate resources have been put in place for this to
happen.
Children looked after by the local authority receive a good service, with a range of
permanence options being secured in a timely way for almost all children. The local
authority provides an individualised permanence plan for each child and is successful
in achieving this outcome for the vast majority of children. Court work is timely and
of a consistently very high quality; the local authority acts with urgency in initiating
proceedings and during proceedings. The adoption service is well managed and
offers a good recruitment and family-finding service. It is offering an exceptional
service to children who can benefit from prompt placements through foster to adopt
and concurrent placements.
The local authority is continuing to tackle the challenges presented by a small group
of older looked after young people with complex needs, which includes poor
educational performance at Key Stage 4. The local authority has put in place
appropriate plans to offer improved coordinated multi-agency services, including:
changes to the virtual school in establishing a virtual governing body that reports to
the Corporate Parenting Board, a comprehensive child and adolescent mental health
service transformation plan, and a new joint therapeutic residential option under the
Innovations Programme. The implementation of Raising the Bar, a programme to
improve levels of educational attainment for every child in Suffolk, demonstrates the
local authoritys priority and determination to improve educational outcomes.
Senior managers are aware that outcomes for care leavers are not good and have a
clear vision for service improvement, supported by additional investment.
The strong progress of the local authority shows good outcomes for the majority of
children across the range of services. Practice is particularly effective in services for
disabled children (both as children in need and as children looked after), the risk
assessment, protection and support of unborn babies, private fostering,
unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people, female genital mutilation, young
people involved with groups or gangs and services for children and young people on
the edge of care.
The local authority is steadily embedding a new casework model as a tool to assist
workers and support families. Workloads are manageable. Staffing has stabilised, the
use of locum staff is decreasing and some help and protection teams have appointed
additional staff to help manage work more effectively.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates five childrens homes. Three were judged to be good
or outstanding in their most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The local authoritys arrangements for the protection of children were previously
inspected in July 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The previous inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after
was in December 2010. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since February 2013.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
December 2014.
 The local authority has delegated social work functions to a registered charity in
respect of children looked after aged 16 and over, and care leavers.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 151,332 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Suffolk. This is 21% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:


in primary schools is 14% (the national average is 16%)



in secondary schools is 11% (the national average is 14%).

 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Mixed (influenced by the presence of United States Air Force bases), and Asian or
Asian British.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:


in primary schools is 8% (the national average is 19%)


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.




in secondary schools is 6% (the national average is 15%).

Child protection in this area
 At 30 November 2015, 3,494 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 30 November 2015, 421 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is a reduction from 452 at 31 March 2015.
 At 1 December 2015, 33 children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from 22 at 31 March 2015.
 Since the last inspection of local authority arrangements for the protection of
children in June 2013, three serious incident notifications have been submitted to
Ofsted. Two were subject to serious case reviews which have been completed or
were ongoing at the time of the inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 November 2015, 758 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 50 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 730 (48 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2015. Of this number:





authority area



nine live in residential special schools,3 all of whom (100%) live out of the
authority area









area







 In the last 12 months (to 30 November 2015):




there have been 77 adoptions






returned to be looked after

These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.




independent living



one young person ceased to be looked after and is now living in a house of
multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that all childrens plans, including children in need, child protection,
children looked after, personal education plans and pathway plans consistently
contain specific actions, measurable timescales and clear intended outcomes so
that the child, their family and professionals know what needs to be achieved.


Improve the quality of assessments to ensure that the voice of the child is fully
integrated and that their case histories are fully considered.


Improve the offer, take-up and timeliness of return interviews for children
missing from home and ensure that data and information relating to all children
who go missing from home, care and school are collated more effectively and
analysed to better inform strategic understanding and planning.


Increase the capacity for meeting the needs of teenagers entering care. This
includes out of hours provision to accommodate them closer to their home area
in regulated placements, minimising disruption and preventing early changes of
placement. Reduce the use of semi-independent accommodation before the
young person is ready.


Improve the provision for educational achievement, particularly at Key Stage 4,
through the pupil premium grant.


Extend the in-county capacity of the services to provide for children looked
after with the most complex needs, through effective agency partnership
working.


Continue to improve the range of suitable accommodation for care leavers,
including Staying Put and supported lodgings, and undertake risk assessments
to ensure that the accommodation meets their support needs.


Increase the awareness of rights and entitlements for care leavers, including
the provision of full health histories.


Increase the pace of change in implementing improved IT and recording
systems to support practitioners in recording and evidencing work and
outcomes.

enable an evaluation of effectiveness.


Summary for children and young people
 Councillors and senior managers have worked hard to improve services for
children and young people. They have made good progress in all areas,
particularly for children who are looked after by the local authority, although
educational outcomes at secondary school level still need to improve.
 Children and their families receive the appropriate help when they need it.
Parents have said that they value this support and that it has helped them.
 Social workers act quickly to ensure that children are safe. They know children
well, visit them often and listen to what they tell them.
 Social workers are good at helping children to return to live with their own family,
or with another family if their own family is not able to keep them safe.
 Social workers try hard to find the right foster carers and adopters for children
and they prepare and support them properly. Some children have lived with a
number of different foster carers and have had to move schools before they are
settled.
 Social workers know when children go missing or when they are at risk of being
sexually exploited. Some children are not offered the opportunity to talk to
someone when they return from going missing, which makes it harder to keep
them safe.
 Social workers records are not always clear enough about what happened and
why, and this needs to improve.
 Care leavers do not always receive a good service; some do not live in the best
accommodation to meet their needs, and some do not know what rights they
have as care leavers. Managers know that the service is not good enough and are
working hard to make improvements. Care leavers told us that they feel safe
where they live and that they value the support of the staff who work with them.
 Councillors and senior managers take their role as corporate parents very
seriously. They are really good at listening to children and value their views on
how to develop and improve services. The children in care council (C2C) and
Brighter Futures for younger children are making a real difference to services for
children; two care leaver apprentice commissioners are helping to make sure that
the views of children and young people are taken into account.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and protection

Requires improvement

Services for children and their families who need help and protection require
improvement to be good. Although there are considerable strengths and evidence of
sustained progress, demonstrating ongoing improvement, some areas are not
sufficiently or consistently embedded to have yet reached a good standard.
Early help services for children and their families are good. There are early signs of
increased impact through the new integrated early help teams and the Signs of
Safety and Well-being casework model. Some aspects of this work have been
particularly effective, including Suffolk Family Focus (work undertaken with troubled
families) and joint work with the police and other specialist services regarding child
sexual exploitation, gangs and groups, and female genital mutilation.
Partner agencies are developing a clearer understanding of thresholds when specific
services need to be involved. This is resulting in more appropriate contacts and
referrals. Partner agencies are positive about the prompt support and advice
available to them through the MASH (multi-agency safeguarding hub) professional
telephone contact line and the referral process.
Customer First offers an efficient and effective access to services. The relatively new
MASH provides a sound multi-agency response, with appropriate decision-making
seen in relation to the need for assessments and strategy discussions. The service
has only recently started ensuring that input from education has been sought for all
school-age children.
Children in need and children in need of protection are receiving help at the right
level. In most cases seen by inspectors, risk of harm and its significance were
understood and responded to appropriately.
While children are seen within reasonable timescales in the majority of cases, case
recording does not always note whether the child is seen alone or evidence how
direct work with the child, and their wishes and feelings, influence case practice and
care planning. The quality of assessments is inconsistent, with some not being
informed by the voice of the child, historical factors or a clear rationale for decisionmaking. Child in need and child protection plans vary in quality, with some not
showing clear actions, timescales or outcomes.
The offer and take-up of return interviews for children missing from home are low,
meaning that planning at both an individual and strategic level is not sufficiently
robust. This is steadily improving and the local authority has taken action to sustain
improvements further.


Inspection findings
and well developed. Thirteen locality teams, co-located in almost every case
with childrens social care, are helping to ensure that needs are identified and
responded to at the earliest opportunity. All early help staff have had training
on the new case work model Signs of Safety and Well-being. High-quality
assessments, using the common assessment framework (CAF), are timely and
child-centred. CAF and team-around-the-child plans are regularly reviewed and,
with weekly transfer meetings, step-up and step-down arrangements are
dynamic and well managed. Eighty-five per cent of the families who responded
to the latest monthly survey reported that their situations had improved as a
result of the early help they had received.
integration with health visiting and school nursing services in April 2015.
Registrations have increased to 67.6% and are likely to increase still further
now that registration consent forms incorporate a new data sharing agreement,
and those responsible for maintaining and updating the NHSs SystmOne are
based in the local authoritys intelligence hub. As well as offering a range of
evidence-based parenting programmes, childrens centre staff are using video
interaction guidance to help improve communication and change parenting
behaviour. Good take-up of early years entitlement is having a positive impact
on childrens development.
increasing educational attainment and employment, Suffolk Family Focus has
improved outcomes for 1,150 troubled families. The aim is to achieve similar
results with 950 families a year over the next five years. There is an impressive
range of voluntary sector services, including, for example, intensive time-limited
support for families where the primary carer has drug and/or alcohol issues,
and an extensive outreach service for victims of domestic abuse. This means
that more families are getting the right service at the right time.
programme and a successful Activities Unlimited service. Up to 2,000 disabled
children are enrolled as members of Activities Unlimited, which enables them to
access a range of short break and leisure activities.
that the service provided by the contact centre is safe, efficient and effective.
Customer service advisers identify risks and needs, and referrals are passed to
social workers in a timely way for assessment.


help services (CAFs), assessment or child in need services, is collated and
monitored effectively. The majority of feedback shows a positive response to
services, with high levels of satisfaction. Partners understanding of, and
confidence in, the thresholds for access to childrens social care are increasing.
They are making good use of, and are positive about, the professional
telephone contact line in the MASH, where they can receive timely advice and
guidance.
information-sharing. Staff working in the MASH have a good understanding of
the threshold criteria. Risks and needs are identified, assessed and prioritised
appropriately, leading, in the vast majority of cases, to a suitably swift
response. In all cases seen, consent was recorded appropriately. However, staff
in the MASH are not always sufficiently rigorous in gathering information from
other agencies and professionals. For example, schools are not routinely
consulted about the information they have about children and families. The rate
of child protection enquiries is higher than in similar authorities, although
inspectors did not find any evidence of children and families being subjected to
investigations unnecessarily. In a small number of cases, inspectors found that
the method for recording section 47 investigations was resulting in inaccurate
data. Managers took action to correct this practice during the inspection.
level, is good and strategy discussions are timely. However, while strategy
meetings organised by the MASH ensure that information is shared effectively
between agencies, leading to clear and specific identification of risks, practice
elsewhere is more variable. Participation in strategy discussions outside of the
MASH is more limited and often only involves the police and childrens social
care. Inspectors saw evidence of email exchanges between consultant social
workers and safeguarding managers to confirm the need for an initial child
protection conference being classed as strategy discussions, which is inaccurate
and has the potential to distort performance management information.
does not consistently indicate whether they are seen alone or fully reflect their
voices. Additionally, although most social workers know their children well, it is
not always clear from case recording how effective social workers are in using
direct work to ascertain childrens needs, wishes and feelings and/or how
childrens needs, wishes and feelings inform and influence case planning and
practice. (Recommendation)


routinely updated in every case. In good assessments, the influence of the new
casework model is strongly evident; risks and protective factors are clearly
identified and analysed; childrens wishes and feelings are actively explored,
inform the assessment and are reflected in the plan. However, as the local
authoritys own audits demonstrate, a minority of assessments are not yet
good. In those cases, risks are not sufficiently explicit or clearly articulated, and
analysis, particularly of the impact of the toxic trio, is not sufficiently well
developed. Childrens views are insufficiently represented. In a very small
number of cases, this results in a lack of appropriate focus or leads to delay in
children and families getting the right help and support. (Recommendation)
events in the childs life. This does not assist in providing a clear overall
understanding of a childs life or the impact of any previous interventions by
services. Genograms are used to provide a visual record of family relationships
but need further work to ensure that they are of a consistently high standard
and easy to understand. Social workers who spoke to inspectors were able to
demonstrate that they are using research and theory to inform their practice,
but this was not always evident in their written assessments.
(Recommendation)
parenting capacity and timely decision-making ensure that unborn babies are
effectively safeguarded.
precision about areas of concern or outcomes required, and are not sufficiently
specific or measurable. This makes them less effective as tools to monitor
progress. Contingency planning is not consistently well developed. In these
cases there was a lack of escalation and challenge in the review process.
(Recommendation)
a child protection plan for more than two years. This currently affects five
children. Chairs of child protection conferences review cases to assure
themselves that plans are effective and consider whether the threshold for a
legal planning meeting is met. Appropriate action is taken if required.


protection conference chairs, is contributing to an improvement in the level and
quality of engagement with children and families. It has also helped to enhance
other agencies contributions to the assessment of risks and their involvement
in monitoring child protection and other plans. Effective multi-agency working
was seen in the majority of child protection and child in need cases; this multiagency involvement helped to minimise risk and improve outcomes for children.
is generally good. Child in need plans are reviewed regularly and in the majority
of cases the plans effectively impacted on service provision and achieving the
desired outcomes.
appropriate and proportionate response as risks and needs change. An audit
carried out by the Local Safeguarding Children Board found that some cases
were closed prematurely and subsequently re-referred because of the same
concerns, although this was not evident during the inspection. Of the 1,746
referrals completed in the three months before the inspection, 23% (402) were
re-referrals and those seen by inspectors were appropriate.
always followed through in subsequent case management supervision and
progress and childrens outcomes are not always effectively captured in case
notes. Actions were delayed in a small number of cases as a result of ineffective
management oversight.
referrals from the police leading to service provision and for consideration at
the multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARACs). However, social care
case recording does not consistently evidence actions being undertaken as a
result of discussions at the MARAC.
considered at the tactical tasking and coordination group (TTCG). The child
sexual exploitation risk assessment tool, which is used for referrals to the
TTCG, showed appropriate evidence of risk analysis. However, return home
interviews are not consistently offered and completed to identify factors that
influence the young people that go missing, so this information is not available
when assessing risk. The local authority is aware of this and is in the process of
appointing a child exploitation coordinator and a missing children coordinator to
further improve the response. Gang affiliation is appropriately considered and
positive evidence was seen of complex strategy discussions and review at the
TTCG, with direct work being undertaken with young people.
(Recommendation)


database for children missing education will move to a new system in January
school regardless of whether they are looked after or not. The missing
education coordinator has effective links with the police and UK Visas and
Immigration, and is also a member of the TTCG. The tracking of children
missing from education is robust; schools have clear guidance to support them
and monthly monitoring has led to better school attendance and a reduction in
persistent absence.
marriage and radicalisation leads to proactive and immediate safeguarding of
young people, underpinned by comprehensive multi-agency support. A
particular strength is the active partnership working between social care and
early help family support practitioners, along with the specialist Make a Change
child sexual exploitation team on cases of child sexual exploitation and female
genital mutilation. This provides continuity of relationships and sensitive
specialised support for children and families. Impressive protective work was
demonstrated by workers in a case of female genital mutilation.
children and adults. It delivers an effective service to children and families in
crisis outside of office hours. Access to the fostering out of hours service is
reassuring for foster carers and helps to reduce unnecessary placement
disruption. Communication between the EDS and day-time services is good.
privately fostered children are well managed and effective. There are a high
number of notifications (93 during 201415, of which 19 did not meet the
criteria) and a combined total of 133 notifications and active, open cases during
the same period. Currently, 37 children and young people are in private
fostering arrangements. There is a dedicated private fostering panel, ensuring a
high level of monitoring and oversight. Additional temporary capacity has been
added to further improve awareness-raising by an already successful service.
people aged 16 or 17 at risk of homelessness. In 2014, the Corporate Parenting
Board tasked the young persons suitable accommodation task and finish group
with reviewing the supply of suitable accommodation for 16- and 17-year-old
care leavers and young people potentially presenting as homeless. They have
raised the profile of youth homelessness and children looked after through an
active role in the Suffolk Strategic Housing Partnership and the development
and adoption of the Health and Housing Charter for Suffolk. There have been
significant improvements in the last two years on prevention of homelessness
for families and young people due to the early help offer and effective
partnership engagement.


improvement and has invested in two full-time designated officer posts. Work
seen by inspectors showed evidence of a timely and proportionate response to
referrals and allegations with clear audit trails of events, actions and decisions.
However, the designated officer service action plan is not outcome-focused or
sufficiently specific and does not, for example, reflect the need or commitment
to establish and further develop partnerships with education, health,
independent fostering agencies or the voluntary sector. While data and
information are being collected, they are not being analysed effectively to
identify key issues or patterns in reporting or referral sources, for example
identifying schools that have not reported any cases.
Between April to September 2015, attendance of children eligible to be invited
was 33.3% at initial child protection conferences, and 21.1% at review child
protection conferences, with low take-up of advocacy. The child protection
conference chairs have an action plan to address this and are exploring
alternative methods of obtaining feedback from children and timing reviews to
be after school hours, alongside capacity issues in the advocacy service being
closely monitored through contract monitoring.
evidenced in assessments. Social workers can articulate how this has or will be
considered as part of their thinking, but this was not sufficiently reflected or
analysed in case recording of the cases tracked by inspectors. Stronger practice
was evidenced for children with disabilities, with staff clearly eliciting and
supporting the voice of the child using a range of techniques to meet the
communication needs of individual children. Strong evidence was seen of the
use of consistent translator services for young people, with child protection
documents translated to ensure that parents understood the risks and the
actions required of them.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Substantial improvements in services to children and young people who need to be
looked after have been achieved since the previous inspection in 2010. Active, early
assessment takes place to gauge need and prevent children from becoming looked
after where it is in their interests. Decisions then made to look after children and
young people are clear and timely, with highly effective processes ensuring that
realistic thresholds are applied, with no delay in action being taken. Children are
cared for within their extended family where possible; these family members are
given the same level of support as other approved carers.
Court orders to secure good outcomes are sought, focusing on safety, stability and
permanence. Placement stability has also improved over recent years; it is now
good, and particularly strong for younger children, where some elements are
outstanding.
The individual needs of children are sensitively considered and their views are heard.
There is careful consideration of whether they should live with their brothers and
sisters. Where this is not possible, arrangements supporting continuing contact are in
place, if appropriate.
While efforts are made to maintain a young person within their school placement,
this is not always successful, particularly for older children. The majority of children
looked after attend good or better schools.
Significant advances have been made in assessing and addressing the health needs
of children and young people, although improvements are required in meeting their
emotional needs.
Adoption as a permanency option is considered early for children where care
proceedings are being initiated. The local authority has a small number of children
waiting to be adopted, with 70 children adopted in the last year. Suffolk is rated well
above the national average of local authorities in England for children being adopted.
Once matched, children quickly move in with their adoptive families. Children and
their families receive good-quality, post-adoption support. As a result, the disruption
rate is very low.
Services for care leavers are improving, but the impact has yet to be seen in some
aspects of care, for example in pathway planning. Ambitious commissioning is in
progress, with improving partnership working, but there remains much that is yet to
be achieved. While the arrangements are safe for independent living, young people
are not always sufficiently prepared for this. Young people who are homeless and
vulnerable benefit from being considered as looked after. Young people are positive
about the accessibility, support and positive relationships they have with their
workers.


Inspection findings
care in Suffolk in recent years. These improvements reflect a commitment that
puts safe, stable lives for children at the heart of the work undertaken. The
large majority of children are receiving good-quality, purposeful and wellcoordinated services. The local authority acknowledges that further work is still
needed to achieve consistency across some parts of the county, as well as to
improve services for a small but important group of older children with more
complex needs, who come into care in the later years of their childhood.
need are being delivered across the county, particularly through the family
assessment support (FAST) staff within social care teams. These provide
intensive and flexible interventions, often within an extended family focus.
Workers try to ensure that children and young people remain in their families
wherever possible, as well as supporting those who return home after a period
in care. These teams are successful and demonstrate positive impact by
ensuring that many children are maintained within the family networks or
remain there if they return home.
care unless it is necessary. This is a particular strength in relation to those who
are very young and those yet to be born. The role and functions of the child
resource panel and associated legal planning and tracking systems ensure and
support determined action at an early stage. Robust decision-making is in
place, ensuring that thresholds are applied appropriately and delay is avoided.
Assessments of those most at risk or in need are clear, robust and well-focused
on safety, stability and permanence for children at this stage.
has led to an increase in kinship care arrangements, child arrangement orders
and special guardianship orders. More than one in eight children leaving care
go to their extended family under a special guardianship order. This is similar to
the number of children who leave care through adoption. The same level of
support is offered to children who leave care either by adoption or by a special
guardianship order.
being in care, offering challenging and appropriate additional scrutiny,
particularly on cases that pose a high risk or complex challenges. The
arrangement for stop and review by a senior manager if concerns persist is a
particularly useful approach to ensure that protective, coordinated action is
achieved when necessary.


only taken into care when this is in their best interests. Where there is a need
to intervene through the use of public law, the local authority, supported by
effective legal advice and guidance, performs its duties to a consistently high
standard. Suffolk is among the highest-performing authorities in the country; in
the second quarter of 201516, public law proceedings were being completed
within 22 weeks, and timeliness continues to improve.
and plans for those young people becoming looked after for reasons other than
abuse or neglect, particularly in taking account of their  sometimes  extensive
history of involvement with targeted services. (Recommendation)
young people to appropriate places for them to live, with a very high proportion
of children remaining both within the area as well as being provided through an
efficient in-house service. For most children, arrangements are often well made,
with appropriate consideration of extended family or connected others. Few
children are placed outside of the area and, where this takes place, it is almost
always because of the childs additional needs and the specialist services
required for them.
that is meeting their needs and the majority of carers are highly positive about
the support they receive from the local authority. Some children entering care
as the result of a crisis out of hours are not always placed in a local or enduring
placement. Many experience an early change of placement, with some being
provided with very temporary provision through arrangements known as the
crash pad. While safety is paramount and is considered in such placements,
immediate provision of potentially stable accommodation has not been such a
priority. (Recommendation)
maintaining schools and continuing other services, and then proximity to birth
and extended family, particularly where rehabilitation is the plan for
permanence for the child. The wishes and feelings of the child are also
considered within this. Few children (34 of the 758) are looked after out of the
area and beyond the immediately adjoining areas. Where this is the case, it is
usually due to their highly complex needs or placement with extended family
members. There are good or better levels of placement stability for most
children, with fewer than 10% of primary school age or young children
experiencing substantial placement disruption in the previous year.


are matched with carers able to meet these needs. Those caring for asylumseeking young people are also sensitive to their cultural and other needs. The
local authority is recruiting carers that can provide for more children with higher
or more complex levels of need. The central resource team uses a wide range
of provision to provide placements, including almost 100 places from
independent providers.
children) is substantially accounted for by an appropriate increase in young
people becoming looked after, including a significant increase in the number of
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children from 17 in November 2014 to 33 in
November 2015. The local authority recognises that some children and young
people have not previously experienced sufficient help and protection. Assertive
and positive decisions are now being made. For some children who have
previously experienced periodic neglect and/or emotional harm, achieving safe
and stable arrangements remains both a priority and a challenge for the local
authority. For a small number of these young people in their mid-teens, this has
led to a challenge in ensuring that there are enough well-supported
placements. Also, some of these young people experience several placements,
including being away from family, school and friends. Although, this involves
additional disruption, it frequently results in achieving a better match of
placement in the long term. Again, this is most likely to be the case with
children at Key Stage 4 and beyond. (Recommendation)
Social workers visit children frequently, spending time alone with them to help
establish a trusting relationship and getting to know their hopes and wishes.
Children and young people are helped to understand what is happening to
them through innovative and effective life story work. Almost all children say
they have trust and confidence in their social worker. In the current year, this
has proved difficult for some, due to organisational restructuring in social care,
resulting in some children being assigned a different social worker as a
consequence of these changes, although managers made efforts to reduce
disruption for individual children. The impact of this on some children has also
been mitigated by active relationships and consistent involvement of the childs
independent reviewing officer (IRO).
for. They are able to tell the childs story, outline their plan and their own
actions, as well as those of other professionals and carers. This clarity is not
always reflected in the written records; full, clear and up-to-date chronologies,
assessments and plans are not always well documented. The arrangements for
recording key documents are improving, but managers acknowledge that more
work is needed to achieve consistently high-quality outcome-focused plans.
This is not helped by the multitude of databases and document storage
arrangements.


clearly in recent months. The change in the whole service approach, using the
new casework model, is positive and has resulted in a rapidly improving focus
in recorded planning. Similarly, while management guidance and direction had
also not been consistently recorded, practitioners were able to clearly describe
routine and positive casework supervision, challenge and oversight by their
managers.
practitioners and placement providers appropriately using tools such as the
child sexual exploitation risk assessment matrix to assess, monitor and adapt
plans. Return interviews are timely, where agreed by the young person, taking
place in line with levels of risk and complexity. Routine aggregated analysis of
return interviews does not fully inform intelligence of patterns of possible risk,
although examples were seen where broader intelligence has driven and
supported targeted activity to prevent or disrupt potential harm.
the child. They talk positively about the training they receive and the care taken
in planning for the child, meeting their needs and the contact arrangements.
Those looking after children with complex and challenging behaviours are also
being strongly supported through Zipwire, an in-house intensive support service
for carers.
very well. There is a continuous flow of communication and testing of the
impact of changes, progress or unplanned events; this is a strength. Reviews
are timely and caseloads are now manageable, showing improvement from the
last inspection in 2010. Some examples seen have shown appropriate
challenge, although this is still not fully consistent. Escalation of concerns or
challenge is part of the relationship between the IRO and the local authority
and routine communication is in place. IROs have also supported the transfer of
case management between workers, ensuring continuity and essential levels of
consistency and trust with children.
through a commissioned service. While there is not a high level of take-up,
many previously receiving support return later when new issues arise for them.
Similar support is also in place for parents less able to understand or
communicate their views. Few complaints are made by both children and
parents in relation to children in care. When these are made the customer care
service is actively engaged at an early stage in considering the merits of the
complaint, with almost all complaints being resolved at the earliest possible
stage.


consider the needs of the child and the potential risks, and appropriate support
is offered. Very few children return to care for a second or subsequent time
(less than 1% of those looked after at the time of the inspection). This is
impressive and is a particular strength in the area. Those who do return to care
tend to be older children or those who had become looked after through a
voluntary agreement with the parent. Of those children and young people
becoming looked after in the year prior to inspection, almost a quarter were 15years-old or older, but fewer than half were living within a family setting. Many
were placed in residential or semi-independent accommodation. The use of the
latter provision for some young people in care at this young age, when they
remain emotionally and practically unprepared for this level of selfmanagement, is unlikely to support them sufficiently into a stable adulthood.
indicate a strong current performance. Appropriate responses are provided
when a need for sexual health services, substance misuse services or
therapeutic assistance is identified. There has been some detailed analysis of
the overall health needs of children looked after, which is assisting with
commissioning arrangements. It is recognised that the provision of emotional
and psychological support services through child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS), and a specific service for children looked after (Connect),
continue to need improvement; a clear, active joint plan is in place to achieve
this.
people on the edge of care, children looked after, and the families with whom
they live, have access to a range of social and leisure activities. An activities
scheme in the south and west of the area provides bespoke individual and
group work approaches with young people. This is a popular scheme and
currently has a waiting list, indicating that this service is of value to children
and their carers.
improvement services are leading to improvements in the attendance and
attainment of primary-aged children looked after in the area. The provisional
results for 2015 indicate significant improvement at Key Stage 2. In reading
and writing, results have improved over the past three years. In 2015,
provisional results indicate that attainment at Key Stage 4 dipped and they
were well below the national average for all pupils. An analysis of the factors
that contributed to these poor results identified that over a third of the young
people entered care during Key Stage 4. The Year 11 young people doing well
at Key Stage 4 had been in care for an average of over five years before taking
their exams. Additionally, a quarter of this group of children changed
placements or schools during Key Stage 4. Nonetheless, results are poor at age


quality of which is checked by the Looked After Children Education Support
Service (LACESS). Schools welcome the very good support from the LACESS
professionals. They report that they are challenged to explain how they spend
the pupil premium grant. However, the quality of personal education plans is
not consistently good, and the pupil premium grant is not being used as
effectively as it could be in all cases to improve outcomes. While absence rates
have dropped slightly, they remain above the average for children looked after
in England. Persistent absence was slightly lower than average in 201314,
compared with other local authorities, but the most recent data show that it
was high in Years 10 and 11, impacting on GCSE outcomes.
older children looked after and care leavers) and Brighter Futures (an activity
group for children looked after aged 12 and under)  is highly active and is
supported well by the local authority. These groups are dynamic and
purposeful, and have a strong social activity base. C2C and Brighter Futures
have influenced a range of practice initiatives; they routinely attend the now
well-focused Corporate Parenting Board, and they have been involved in
developing the revised Promise and associated consultation booklets for
children in care. They have also ensured a no more black bags provision of
appropriate luggage and the allocation of personal laptops for those at Key
Stage 4 and beyond. Looked after young peoples achievements are celebrated
at annual events, with awards tailored to the individuals interests.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
resourced. Adoption is considered for all children who are unable to return
home or live with their birth family and this happens in a timely way. Adoption
is the plan for a wide range of children including older children, children with
complex needs or disability and for brothers and sisters together.


range of different types of permanence for children alongside adoption. There
is a clear, up-to-date statement of purpose and recruitment priorities are
regularly reviewed to ensure that the service is recruiting for the children who
are waiting. The local authority has invested significantly in rebranding its
adoption service and has an effective recruitment strategy with a target to
recruit 50 adopters in 201516. Between April and October 2015, 26 adopters
were approved, demonstrating a considerable strength in recruitment. The local
authority has worked hard to improve the conversion rate from enquiry to
approval and monitors this carefully (currently at 20%, compared with 14% the
previous year). Current priorities are specific geographical areas, those who are
able to offer placements to brothers and sisters, children with disabilities,
complex needs and older children (four years and upwards). The most recently
approved adopters showed positive recruitment in relation to diversity and offer
placement options for a wide range of ages of children.
consideration of in-house approved adopters, the local adoption consortium,
referral to the adoption register and a wide range of external family-finding
services. Suffolk has been particularly successful in implementing a foster to
adopt programme. In 201415, 10 children benefited from early placements
(six foster to adopt and four in concurrent placements) with seven children
being placed in foster to adopt placements between April and October 2015,
enabling early attachment to their primary carer. Foster to adopt is currently
being considered for an older child, demonstrating a continued pro-active
approach and impressive performance for children in this area.
meetings using a tracking system for children with a placement order and
children in proceedings. In the vast majority of cases, child profiles were in
place and were of a good quality. Active family-finding was underway for each
of the nine children currently waiting for adoption.


the DfE target for 2013 to 2016 for the average time between a child entering
care and moving in with his or her adoptive family. This demonstrates good
performance. The time between date of matching and being placed for
adoption is particularly good, currently an average of 13 days, meaning children
move quickly into their adoptive families. The local authority will not, however,
meet the DfE target for 2013 to 2016 for the average time between receiving
court authority to place a child and deciding on a match to an adoptive family.
The authority recognises that it needs to improve the timeframe between
placement order and matching as it does not yet meet the government
threshold of 121 days. There are some longer term issues, which impact on the
figures, for example three children with significant complex needs and two
children whose first adoptive placement disrupted. The local authority is
persistent in finding the right places for these children. Overall, the picture is an
improving one. For matches between April and October 2015, the average
timescale is currently 108 days, with 77% of children being matched within
timescale.
adoption extremely well. Child permanence reports seen were of consistently
high quality, being comprehensive and analytical with an appropriate balance of
history and the childs individual needs. There was a sensitive understanding of
the impact on birth parents and wider family. Viability assessments of the
extended family were of a consistently high quality, with appropriate
consideration given to a range of extended family members.
within the recruitment, assessment and matching team and also within the new
permanence support team. This capacity increases the ability to respond to new
referrals in a timely manner, prioritising any urgent need, matching children
and supporting families to minimise the risk of disrupted placements.
demonstrated an understanding of diversity issues. Adopters spoken to were
positive about their initial enquiry to the service, had received a timely and
realistic response and thought highly of their social workers. The majority of
adopters have timely progression through the different stages. At October
Delays in the assessments seen during the inspection were appropriate. The
local authority currently has 15 adopter households waiting to be matched with
children.
foster carer and, although the impact is lessened for children, this is an area
that should be given a higher priority. There are low numbers of cases where
plans change away from adoption, at 5.6%, but delays were seen in a very
small number of cases when securing a different form of permanency, following
a change of plan.


held to consider work in a timely way and avoid delay. The panel is
appropriately constituted, well supported and well chaired. It includes panel
members who have personal experience of being adopted or fostered, adopters
and elected members who consistently attend. The panel provides feedback on
the quality of each report and on the presentation by social workers. This has
contributed to improving practice, with reports being of a consistently high
standard. Decisions by the agency decision-maker are timely and there is
appropriate challenge.
post-permanence support, with 76 families currently receiving adoption
support. One adopter spoke about the range of support her family received,
which enabled them to cope; this included different services for each child
appropriate to their needs and counselling for the parents. Adoptive parents
spoken to were aware of their entitlement to support and how to access it.
They were impressed at the speed at which the support was available following
their assessment and at the quality of support received. In particular, adopters
spoke highly of the Theraplay support they and their children had received.
the high-quality training they had received. The local authority has invested in
training three staff in video interactive guidance, for example. There is a good
range of in-house and commissioned services.
summaries for individual children seen by inspectors also evidenced this.
Adopters spoke of receiving concrete information during their preparation days,
which helped them to understand the potential impact of specific complex
health needs on the child and the family.
year) and, appropriately, considers any learning through a formal disruption
meeting. In addition, the permanence panel chair and the agency adviser
produced a report on disruptions, which has been used by the panel and
frontline social workers.
about the positive learning and development culture. The local authority will be
undertaking a review of its new structure within the service following
reorganisation in April 2015 to consider its effectiveness, and plans to include
adopters in development of service review and service delivery.


The graded judgement about the experiences and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
outcomes are variable and inconsistent. The local authority has recognised the
need to improve services and outcomes. It has given this a concerted focus,
including a task and finish group looking specifically at accommodation. At the
time of the inspection, 29 (10%) care leavers were living in unsuitable
accommodation; twelve young people were in custody. For care leavers aged
were in custody; this is an improving picture from 20% in 201314. The
Corporate Parenting Boards priority to ensure a wider choice of more
appropriate and suitable accommodation for young people has resulted in a
clear vision with robust commissioning plans in place to improve outcomes;
new contracts are due to begin in April 2016.
accommodation. The local authority continues to reduce the use of this type of
accommodation, from 22 young people 12 months ago to two, including two
young people who were moved to suitable placements from bed and breakfast
accommodation during the inspection. Some care leavers, particularly those
aged 16 and 17 years, have had three or more changes in accommodation until
they experienced stability. This indicates that young people are not ready to live
independently and have been moved too early into this type of accommodation,
or have not been offered accommodation that fully meets their support and
preparation needs. For some young people, risk assessments have not routinely
been undertaken or updated in relation to specific accommodation when they
move. (Recommendation)
with their worker. They feel supported and listened to and receive practical and
financial help. One young person receiving support said of his personal adviser
He is fantastic and that he was Glad they are here. The local authority
commissions 16+ services from a national charitable organisation and keeps in
touch with 98% of its care leavers.
years old to ensure that their accommodation meets their support needs.
Responses to care leavers missing or at risk of child sexual exploitation are
variable. However, one case seen by inspectors demonstrated a proactive
response to protect a young person, with risk assessments updated to reflect
changing needs.


help and support. Positive examples seen during the inspection included a
worker attending a health appointment with one care leaver and a housing
assessment for another pregnant young person who required alternative
accommodation with increased support. Staff identify and respond well to
young peoples diversity and identity needs.
maintain relationships with their carers. At the time of the inspection, the local
authority had 21 young people in these arrangements. Promotion of Staying Put
arrangements is inconsistent. Opportunities to stay put for those young people
in supported lodgings require further development. (Recommendation)
employment or training (NEET). Of these, 91 (46%) were 19- to 21-year-olds.
Several projects are in place to increase participation in education, employment
or training. One specific project is a joint venture with British Exploring, which
provides experiences in remote locations. When young people are in stable
placements they sustain their participation in learning and do well, with
currently about 100 in colleges or school sixth forms and over 20 at university.
The transition from Year 11 to Year 12 was planned effectively this year with all
young people, who took their GCSEs in July 2015, being offered a place of
learning or training in September 2015.
confidence or resilience to sustain their engagement in education, employment
or training. Those spoken to were not able to talk about the help they had
received to encourage them to further their learning or training, although there
are many opportunities available, such as through the Pathway Into Learning
And Work (PILAW) project or the MyGo provision, a youth employment centre.
Participation is improving, with currently 59 young people registered with MyGo
in Ipswich.
apprenticeships. The local authority has created an apprentice commissioner
scheme, ring-fenced for two care leavers, which provides opportunities to
develop skills and gain work experience and training to secure future
employment. The apprenticeship commissioners are working with children
looked after and care leavers on the design and shaping of service provision
and this is a strength of the service.
The post-16 personal education plans are new and most pathway plans lack
clear and aspirational learning or training targets for care leavers.


with sufficient management oversight. The detail of the plans is not specific or
outcome-focused and the quality varies, with the majority not having clear
timescales for actions. Risk assessments are not always updated, and lack
evidence of how risks will be mitigated and reduced. (Recommendation)
central throughout the plan and not all young people receive a copy. The local
authority is piloting redesigned pathway plans to incorporate the new casework
model and the Promise charter. (Recommendation)
make choices, and are provided with information on their health needs,
including sexual health. The majority of care leavers are registered with a GP
and a dentist. Health passports are in development. However, at the moment,
some young people do not have all the information they require on their health
to support them into adulthood. (Recommendation)
aim to build a strong sense of identity and achievement, while helping young
people to develop skills and opportunities for training and employment. These
include preparing and cooking a collective Christmas dinner for care leavers,
staff and managers to enjoy together. Other activities include volunteer
opportunities on school holiday schemes, the Princes Trust and celebration of
achievement awards, with recent examples including 10 young people
participating in a camping trip and eight young people on target for a trip to
trek around Iceland.
very small number of young people who disengage with services. Case
recording does not fully reflect this and the multiple recording systems do not
support consistency in recording or information sharing within the team, with
some information being difficult to find.
well received by staff and communication is improving for care leavers in
receipt of both services. The two services are not yet fully coordinated in their
systems for care leavers to support information sharing, particularly in risk
assessments and pathway plans.


living independently and received help with budgeting and attending
appointments. Knowledge of entitlements and rights information and the work
of C2C, the local authoritys children in care council, are not fully embedded and
known to all care leavers. The local authority is aware of the need to promote
this further and is developing an app, funded by the virtual school, to support
the promotion of rights and entitlements. There is also a dedicated website for
young people, The Source, which young people helped to design. This has a
dedicated section for care leavers, including an entitlement guide for young
people leaving care.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

A strong and energetic senior management team with a clear sense of purpose and
direction, robust governance arrangements and clear lines of accountability is
transforming the way in which services are designed, developed and delivered.
Outcomes for children are improving.
The local authority knows itself well. Senior leaders have a clear understanding of
strengths and areas for development and are making intelligent and effective use of
qualitative and quantitative data to address shortfalls and raise practice standards.
Lessons learned from audits are acted on and the quality of practice is improving
strongly.
The local authority is continually looking for ways to deliver best value, while at the
same time improving outcomes for children, young people and families. A more
coherent approach to procurement and commissioning is being developed, one that
is more responsive to the experiences of children and families. Further integration of
the already well-established early help services is starting to have a real impact.
The local authority takes its responsibilities as a corporate parent very seriously. The
children in care and care leavers council is lively, dynamic and influential.
Partnership working, particularly with the police and with health services, is strong.
Inspectors saw evidence of good practice and effective interventions involving child
sexual exploitation, gangs, unaccompanied asylum-seekers, female genital mutilation
and radicalisation.
Positive Choices, which supports women who have previously had a child taken into
care, is a particular example of good practice.
The strength of the local authoritys approach to permanency means that children
looked after are being well served, with some outstanding features of practice.
A simple and uncomplicated approach to recruitment, retention and development is
contributing to a more settled and stable workforce. Staff morale is good.
While there is a strong trajectory of improvement, the local authority recognises that
there is much still to do. The quality of strategic action plans varies. The impact and
effectiveness of frontline management are not sufficiently robust. The planned
transformation of services to meet the mental and emotional health and well-being
needs of children and young people cannot happen soon enough. Accommodation
services for young people aged 16 to 18 are being recommissioned. Educational
attainment, particularly for children looked after, continues to be a cause for
concern.


Inspection findings
governance arrangements are leading to improved outcomes for children,
young people and families. Senior leaders are energetic, active and visible.
They understand the scale of the challenges they and their staff face and are
realistic about strengths and areas for development. Rigorous implementation
of Making Every Intervention Count (MEIC), a five-year transformation
programme, is changing the way services are designed, developed and
delivered. The Director and Deputy Director of Childrens Services routinely
consider and observe frontline practice and, as part of their commitment to
openness and transparency, members of staff are able to sit in on meetings of
the departmental management team and provide feedback.
Trust Board, the Health and Wellbeing Board and the Local Safeguarding
Children Board (LSCB), and good engagement with elected members, enable
effective scrutiny and critical challenge. For example, the Education and
Childrens Services Scrutiny Committee has provided appropriate critical
challenge on issues such as the recruitment, retention and turnover of social
workers and the quality of mental health services for children and young
people. As well as reviewing performance management information, the
Childrens Services Accountability Board closely monitors the progress of MEIC.
authority and its partners have a good understanding of the shape and scale of
existing provision, appreciate the likely demand for services in the future and
are aware of gaps that need to be addressed. Chief among these are the
limited availability and capacity of services to meet the mental and emotional
health and well-being needs of children and young people and the sufficiency of
placement and accommodation options for young people aged 1618. Urgent
action is already being taken to improve these services. The Health and
Wellbeing Board has successfully accessed additional funding of 6 million over
five years to support the transformation of CAMHS, and accommodation
services are in the process of being recommissioned.


strategically plan and monitor progress and impact. However, the quality of
strategic action plans is variable. In some cases, such as the CAMHS
transformation plan, these are ambitious and clear. In others, such as the highlevel strategic action plan on child exploitation, children who are missing and
gangs, and the hidden harm action plan, plans are not sufficiently outcomefocused, specific or measurable. This makes them less effective as tools with
which to monitor progress and hold others to account. Moreover, although the
local authority and its partners have recently completed a strategic needs
assessment of hidden harm, they have yet to agree a formal multi-agency
strategy on neglect. This is a significant omission and has the potential to
undermine the effectiveness of the collective response to the corrosive impact
of domestic abuse, parental mental ill-health and substance misuse on the lives
of children and young people. (Recommendation)
robust procurement arrangements, is helping to build capacity and shape the
market. As well as making public their commissioning intentions for 201516,
commissioners have worked hard to ensure that providers understand the
strategic direction of travel.
and children, young people and families are being brought into the centre of
commissioning activity. For example, young people have delivered
presentations to providers at stakeholder engagement events and are involved
in evaluating tenders. Additionally, commissioning and decommissioning
decisions about short break services are influenced by feedback via social
networking sites from children and young people with disabilities, and two care
leavers, who have been appointed as apprentice commissioners. This gives
children, young people and families greater influence over the way in which
services are designed and developed.
their responsibilities as corporate parents. The Corporate Parenting Board,
which meets bi-monthly and includes representatives from C2C, is able to
demonstrate that it is having an impact. For example, it has been influential in
helping to virtually eliminate the use of bed and breakfast accommodation for
care leavers, eradicating the use of black bin bags by children looked after for
their belongings when they change placements and producing, in collaboration
with C2C, a revised Promise in three easy-to-understand and age-specific
leaflets. The board has also developed a more flexible and responsive approach
to the provision of laptops for children looked after and care leavers who are
pupils/students. It is also improving career pathways for care leavers through
the introduction of more apprenticeships in both the county and district
councils.


Childrens Services, the lead member and the LSCB chair ensures that there is
good four-way communication. The Director of Childrens Services meets
monthly with the Chief Executive and separately with the LSCB chair. The Chief
Executive meets with the LSCB chair once every quarter. As well as providing
the Chair of the LSCB with the opportunity to exert influence, this means that
the LSCB is being held to account effectively.
workforce, and the recent roll-out of equipment to support mobile working has
been welcomed. The complex range of IT systems currently used is a challenge
for practitioners and does not provide a coherent or easily accessible structure
for record-keeping. The senior managements understanding of this is clear,
including about action required on what needs to be achieved. The local
authority accepts that the pace of this change needs to quicken. Against this
background of challenging IT systems, an intelligent and purposeful approach
to the development and use of performance management information is
helping to create a culture in which performance is seen as everybodys
business. (Recommendation)
individual, team and area performance and provides a direct line of sight to
what is happening at the frontline. Performance monitoring reports are
routinely scrutinised. Information is being used to identify and explore issues
and concerns, although these do not routinely have a written commentary, and
accompanying analysis to highlight causal and mitigating factors. For example,
in one case, interrogation of referral data raised concerns that, following further
enquiries, culminated in a major investigation into young people being groomed
as drug-runners by adult gang members. However, the current dataset does
not include any information about the offer or completion of return home
interviews or the use, outside of the MASH, of the child sexual exploitation
toolkit. This means that middle and senior managers rely on manuallygenerated information and/or repeat audits to know what is happening in those
areas.
insight into the progress and experience of children, young people and families.
Lessons learned from audits are used well to identify and address areas for
improvement. Members of the quality assurance and professional development
team, led by the principal social worker, have regular quarterly meetings with
area teams to review key messages. As a result, the proportion of assessments
judged to be good or better has improved significantly, as has the quality of
child-centred practice. However, senior managers acknowledge that further
work is required to ensure that plans are of a consistently high standard.


However, the impact and effectiveness of frontline management are not
sufficiently strong in relation to the quality of supervision and management
oversight. The recent introduction of the new, but critically important, role of
consultant social workers is intended to address this through the additional
supervisory support this role will provide to team practice managers; a
programme for the development of these staff is underway. Supervision takes
place regularly for most staff. Management oversight was seen in the majority
of case files, but in a small number it was unclear how much this had directed
or influenced practice. Management compliance with the expectation that they
audit at least one case per month currently stands at 57%, which is below the
acceptable standard.
openness to different ways of thinking and working and a willingness to
innovate. Bringing together health visitors, childrens centres, school nurses,
youth support services, education welfare officers and family support
practitioners, the integration of early help services has increased capacity and is
already starting to increase the proportion of families who access the services.
The adoption of the new casework model and well-being practice framework is
changing the way in which social workers, and others, relate to and
communicate with children and families. Positive Choices, which supports
women who have previously had a child taken into care, is helping to break the
cycle of serial pregnancies and children being removed, and is an example of
good practice.
live with their birth families ensures that children achieve permanency quickly.
Good relationships with the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support
Service (Cafcass), the local family courts and the local Family Justice Board,
supported by robust and vigorous early assessment and decision-making and
high-quality applications, are helping to minimise delay and uncertainty.
Suffolk a more attractive place to work. Job applications from experienced
social workers have increased and turnover rates have fallen. Local authority
reported data show this is down for social workers from 13.5% to 12.6%
between September 2014 and September 2015 and for all social care staff from
to 24. With more manageable caseloads, and a more settled and stable
workforce, outcomes for children, young people and families are improving.


training and development needs is helping to ensure that staff have the right
knowledge and skills. Staff employed in early help and social care have access
to extensive and well-targeted training menus. The learning management
system is used to closely monitor the take-up and delivery of training. The
impact of training is being evaluated through the use of follow-up telephone
calls to practice managers three months after their staff have completed
training courses. Performance appraisals are also being used effectively to
motivate staff and raise performance standards. In the last 12 months, 89% of
staff have had a performance appraisal and, according to the results of the
latest staff survey, most described their performance discussions as helpful.
care service. The head of corporate parenting has direct management oversight
of the service and uses a tracker tool to monitor, on a weekly basis, the
progress of cases, particularly those that are high profile. The providers
activities are included in the monthly performance monitoring reports, which
are scrutinised by the departmental management team, the Childrens Services
Accountability Board, the Corporate Parenting Board and the Quality
Engagement and Improvement Board. The Corporate Parenting Board receives
regular updates on care leavers, including NEET and EET figures, and the
manager of the Corporate Parenting Board is also involved in the quarterly
contract monitoring meetings.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
Executive summary
Suffolks Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is comprehensively addressing its
statutory duties and has evolved into a body that is rigorously holding agencies to
account and strongly influencing improvements across the safeguarding system in
Suffolk. The Board has achieved substantial progress in the last 12 months following
the appointment of a new independent chair, who has galvanised the Board towards
a model featuring greater scrutiny, evaluation and support for partner agencies.
Partners have demonstrably become more engaged within all the Board structures,
appreciating a climate of open evaluative discussion and debate concerning the
effectiveness of safeguarding activities undertaken within their agencies.
The Board holds agencies to account for safeguarding performance through a variety
of quality assurance mechanisms. The Board requires that the quality and relevance
of data and commentary provided demonstrates a sharper focus on safeguarding
outcomes, with indicators that clearly measure performance. The new casework
model is being increasingly adopted to good effect, as a method of partner reporting
to the Board.
The Boards engagement with other strategic bodies has developed quickly, with
examples where this has resulted in constructive challenge and clarification of
priorities across agencies, avoiding duplication and confused accountability. Board
priorities are well informed from diverse sources of intelligence and its field of vision,
across the spectrum of multi-agency safeguarding, is broad. This panoramic scope
does not reduce the Boards focus on key statutory safeguarding responsibilities
including thresholds, the quality of decision-making for referrals and child protection
conferences and plans.
The Board has started to secure feedback and views from children and young people
and recognises that it needs to expand the scope and extent of the information it
receives to introduce a stronger vein of participation and involvement in its
evaluation and influencing of safeguarding services.
The Boards learning and improvement group is the fulcrum of its evaluation
function, featuring a well-targeted multi-agency audit programme and persistent
tracking of recommendations. Demonstrable evidence is sought of more informed
practice emerging and embedding in assessments, plans and interventions across
partner agencies.
Through monitoring, evaluation and challenge, the Board has actively helped the
local authority to achieve the improvements that have been seen.


Recommendations
prevalence of child sexual exploitation across the county, particularly improving
its use of the amalgamated intelligence from children and young peoples return
interviews and activities to disrupt exploitation.
children and young people influence its priorities and plans.
heighten partner agencies understanding and reporting of the impact and
quality of safeguarding practice in their services.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
intelligence sources, including audit recommendations, performance data,
section 11 audit returns, board discussions and serious case reviews (SCRs).
Joint, cross-cutting priorities are agreed with other strategic boards concerning,
for example, hidden harm, domestic abuse and child exploitation. A pan-county
Safer Stronger Communities Group was formed as an outcome of the LSCBs
influence with other boards, determining which strategic body leads on crosscutting safeguarding programmes to avoid duplication and fragmented
accountability. The LSCB chair meets regularly with the chairs of the Health and
Wellbeing, Safeguarding Adults and Corporate Parenting Boards. The Chair also
frequently meets with the Director of Childrens Services, the Lead Member for
children and families and quarterly with the council Chief Executive. The Board
is well supported by a full-time manager and professional adviser.
arrangements of other boards. Two recent examples of the Boards influential
oversight are the implementation of a multi-agency risk assessment conference
(MARAC) strategic steering group to improve coordination and threshold
management for adults and children affected by high-risk domestic abuse, and
the appropriate strategic positioning of responses to female genital mutilation.
Cross-board representation has progressed purposefully, although the Board
recognises that the next evolutionary stage is to continue the construction of
sharper strategic collaborations. It intends to build more integrated approaches
and responses to cross-cutting safeguarding initiatives, including, for example,
a recent increase in self-harm presentations at accident and emergency units.
This has led to the Boards health executive group identifying young people
with repeat attendances, and active consideration of what interventions could
be attempted to address the emotional and mental distress underlying these
behaviours.


cross-board accountabilities. A well-crafted protocol clearly describes the
respective responsibilities of the mental health trust, adults services and the
LSCB, where parents specific vulnerabilities trigger safeguarding concerns
including mental illness, learning difficulties and substance misuse. The number
of referrals made to adults services and monitoring the effectiveness of
responses to them, pursuant to the councils Hidden Harm strategy, is one
example where the protocol has a purposeful impact.
The quality and take-up of early help provision in Suffolk has increased
markedly, but the LSCB retains its concerns that access to the early help
system is not entirely understood by all agencies. Thresholds are not
consistently applied, leading to a continuing, although reducing, pattern of
inappropriate referrals to the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). The
Board is addressing this by revisiting the threshold guidance and service
pathways to ensure that greater clarity and confidence develop across the
childrens workforce. The Board routinely commissions audits of thresholds in
early help, re-referrals, decision-making in child protection enquiries, child
protection conferences and core group planning to identify sources of weaker
practice, designing well-formulated recommendations for improvement.
accountability and support have increased since the appointment of the current
independent chair. This approach is also apparent in the minutes of full Board,
executive group and sub-group meetings. Lay members attested to meetings
that are reflective, questioning and welcoming of their scrutiny as
representatives of the Suffolk public. The Board has a wide field of vision and a
strong understanding of where improvements are required in the safeguarding
system, including, for example, overdue health assessments for children looked
after and the effectiveness of services provided to children who are looked after
outside the county. The Board has purposefully engaged with a significant
number of independent schools in the county and with health partners
regarding young people placed in mental health settings. The LSCB features a
health executive group, providing a single, coherent voice from a diverse
network of health trusts, providers and clinical commissioning groups. An
example of the groups impact is its work with substance misuse services,
collecting data by assisting in identifying young people who may be at risk of
child sexual abuse.


recommendations until sustained evidence of improved practice occurs. The
Board had been concerned, for example, that children and young peoples
services and housing departments did not consistently offer efficient joint
assessments of homeless 16- and 17-year-old young people, potentially leaving
some at risk. The Board has persistently sought improved, accountable and
legally compliant joint responses. Poor attendance, or lack of senior
representation at the Board and its groups, has been purposefully addressed,
leading, for example, to increased engagement of school leaders.
serving as an effective platform to impart key messages and learning priorities
directly to multi-agency frontline practitioners and managers. Importantly, the
Board is also able to receive local intelligence and feedback, extending its
influence to all parts of a large rural county. Senior representation at Board
level from the countys district and borough councils ensures that pertinent
safeguarding recommendations are promptly addressed at that level of
governance. These have recently included licensing work with taxi drivers, in
connection with the child sexual exploitation action plan, and basic
safeguarding training and awareness-raising for local authority housing and
housing association staff.
system, primarily through themed multi-agency audits, completed to high
standards, with recommendations rigorously monitored through the learning
and improvement group. This group, led by the LSCB chair, is at the centre of
the Boards ambition to achieve consistently reliable, robust safeguarding
services. The Learning and Improvement Framework and audit programmes are
aligned with Board priorities and SCR action plans. Recent auditing programmes
have prioritised core statutory safeguarding services, as the Board recognises
that, although improving, some practice is insufficiently robust, such as the
quality of core groups and child protection conferences and plans. This Board
sub-group carefully evaluates all audits undertaken, forming considered
recommendations to the Board on risks, impact and actions.
exercise. Significantly, partners report that the process provides important
learning about the quality of their safeguarding services, enhanced by
constructive peer challenge and support. Action plans are stringently reviewed,
annually, led by the LSCBs professional development adviser. This enabling
approach has generated interest from other agencies, including the Diocese of
St. Edmundsbury and Ipswich, which has chosen to undertake the audit
programme. Over the forthcoming year, agencies will be required to
demonstrate, congruent with Board priorities, how they involve children and
young people in reviewing and influencing their service provision. Partners will
also be asked to illustrate how they are improving awareness and the
application of thresholds in their staff groups.


through the Boards sub-group. One serious incident notification to Ofsted by
Suffolk County Council was significantly delayed, regarding a serious case
review which was in progress at the point of the inspection. The Board
undertook a thorough review of its reporting arrangements, providing
assurance that the single omission did not signal systemic weaknesses in
reporting and making decisions on SCR thresholds. Two recently completed
SCRs have produced significant learning that the Board persistently evaluated
until evidence of improved practice was developed and sustained. The Board
continues to monitor longer-term outcome measures, particularly better
consideration of parents childhood histories in statutory assessments and more
effective interventions with families who resist and avoid interventions. Board
activities are consistently targeted at improving safeguarding services and the
experiences of children.
allowing rapid, evidence-based reviews of each reported death. Modifiable
factors are appropriately identified and regularly reviewed through a learning
and action log. The Panel contains strong public health expertise, facilitating a
research-informed approach and effectively targeted public health campaigns.
children and young peoples services workforce development service. The
content of courses is closely informed by the priorities of the learning and
improvement group. Multi- and single-agency courses are evaluated and
accredited through the Boards professional development adviser, ensuring
consistently high levels of content and trainer proficiency. The majority of
courses are currently evaluated by participants, but the Board is introducing
further rigour, including evaluation of training by frontline line managers,
demonstrating improved practice by frontline staff. The Board is ensuring that
training and learning attendance rates are not viewed as the sole measure of
partner engagement. It is introducing mechanisms that will identify whether
relevant training is reaching all parts of the workforce, through the
establishment of a training sufficiency group.
a spectrum of interlocking vulnerabilities encompassing child sexual
exploitation, trafficked children, female genital mutilation, forced marriage and
gangs and groups. The Board has influenced the implementation of robust
operational responses to identified risk and harm, identifying and addressing
weaknesses in the consistent completion of child sexual exploitation screening
and assessment toolkits and missing from home return interviews. The Board
provided recent multi-agency training on conducting more effective return
interviews to improve the skills of practitioners in acquiring better intelligence
and reducing further missing episodes.


scale and profile of child sexual exploitation in Suffolk is an important Board
priority. Combining intelligence from return interviews of children who have
gone missing and capturing the coordinated impact of disruption activities are
key elements to this work. The Board has recently added additional analytical
and administrative resources to purposefully progress this objective.
(Recommendation)
better demonstrate how the impact of their interventions are improving
childrens experiences and safety. The quality of data has developed, but the
level of evaluative commentary on performance indicators is either absent or
too rudimentary to explain data trends and their impact on producing better
safeguarding services for children and young people. The performance
framework does not consistently include feedback from frontline practitioners
and children and young people. Cross-agency data is not yet systematically
used to inform service and demand planning. (Recommendations)
which are clearly signposted and navigable on an informative and accessible
Board website. While the LSCB has published guidance on neglect, this is not
sufficiently rigorous to assist in monitoring and evaluating impact. Periodic
reviews are undertaken and interim updates completed promptly in response to
new legislative, regulatory and procedural requirements. Expert guidance is
available on the sub-group for specialist areas such as concealed pregnancies
and fabricated or induced illness. A Board priority is to both enhance awareness
of policies and procedures and test the level of compliance with them across
the multi-agency partnership.
does not yet refer to the most recent Working together to safeguard children
(2015) guidance.
performance of Suffolks multi-agency safeguarding services. The report clearly
identifies learning, and provides documented examples of effective,
constructive challenges to other partnership boards.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Louise Hocking
Deputy lead inspector: Nigel Parkes
Team inspectors: Tara Geere, Brendan Parkinson, Julie Knight, Anne Waterman,
Marianick Ellender-Gel, Nick Stacey
Shadow inspector: Tilly Heigh
Senior data analyst: Stewart Hartshorne
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training,
workbased learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in
prisons and other secure establishments. It inspects services for children looked after and child
protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2016

