London Borough of Sutton
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 November 2016 to 8 December 2016
Report published: 13 February 2017

Childrens services in Sutton are good

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Requires improvement


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Childrens services in Sutton are good. The senior leadership team and elected
members are committed and ambitious, and have a clear vision for service
improvement. Leaders and managers have worked relentlessly since the previous
Ofsted inspections in 2012 and 2013 to strengthen the workforce, and the
appointment of permanent heads of service has brought an uncompromising focus
on improving the quality of frontline social work practice. Clear expectations and a
determination to do the right thing are making children in Sutton safer.
Families benefit from a well-coordinated and wide range of early help services,
preventing harm and reducing the need for statutory intervention. This is making a
significant difference, as almost all children and families receive help at the right
time.
Senior managers demonstrate effective challenge, holding first- and second-line
managers to account for monitoring and improving social work practice, so that all
services for children are consistently good enough and improving. Senior managers
know the strengths and weaknesses of their services through regular audit and case
review, although the approach to improving practice as a result is not always
sufficiently timely or systematic.
Help provided by childrens social care is proportionate to risk. When statutory
thresholds are met, a highly effective first response is provided through work
undertaken in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). However, strategy
discussions do not always involve all relevant partners to ensure that full multiagency information informs the initial assessment of risk.
Partnership working is good at both strategic and operational levels in Sutton.
Children in need services benefit from co-location with youth offending teams and a
child psychologist. Together with a speech and language therapist, they provide
specialist help and guidance to families and social work staff, responding quickly
when support is needed and preventing escalation of risk. Children who have
disabilities receive effective and sensitive help that is appropriate to their specific
assessed needs.
Child and family assessments are comprehensive, and risk is analysed well. However,
some do not fully take account of the impact of a childs culture or ethnicity to
ensure that their needs are fully understood. Good-quality multi-agency child
protection and children in need plans clearly set out concerns and risks to children,
so that parents understand what needs to change. Plans are effectively reviewed and
most are updated through regular core groups. Robust action is taken if change is
not achieved, for example through proportionate use of the Public Law Outline (PLO)
and pre-proceedings, safeguarding children and preventing delay.
Most children missing from home and care and those at risk of sexual and gang
exploitation or radicalisation receive well-coordinated help and protection that reduce


harm and risk. Any concerns raised, together with local intelligence, are routinely
shared and lead to an effective and collaborative multi-agency response. Social
workers understand the nature of risks arising from child sexual exploitation and
effectively use a child sexual exploitation tool that helps to measure and monitor the
level of risk.
Children who are on the edge of care receive a range of effective services,
supporting them to remain in the care of their families when it is safe for them to do
so. For some children, when this is not possible, appropriate alternative
arrangements are made available quickly. Almost all children looked after live in
good, stable placements that meet their needs well, and their wishes and feelings
influence their plans.
Services for children looked after or those requiring adoption are good. Achieving
permanence is effectively prioritised. Most children looked after in Sutton benefit
from trusting and enduring relationships with social workers and the people who care
for them. Foster carers demonstrate real warmth towards the children in their care
and pride in their achievements. Almost all children looked after participate in their
reviews, their wishes and feelings are carefully considered and they contribute to
decision making. As a result, children looked after do well in education, the quality of
placements is good and most children feel safe. A high number of children looked
after attend good or better schools in Sutton, proactively supported by the virtual
headteacher. Children looked after have their identity and diversity needs met well.
Children who need adoption benefit from good planning and support. Prospective
adopters are assessed, trained and supported well, and the quality of post-adoption
support is good. As a result, children thrive in their adoptive families.
The quality of help and support for young people leaving care is not consistently
good enough. While many care leavers receive the help and support that they need
to make a successful transition to adulthood, too many do not. Staff are not
proactive enough in keeping in touch with the small number of care leavers who are
less willing to engage, which means that risks are unassessed. Not all care leavers
have up-to-date health assessments and health histories to help them to access
appropriate services to meet their needs.
An active, well-established corporate parenting forum (CPF), supported by a highly
ambitious and knowledgeable chair, ensures prioritisation of services for children
looked after, and officers are held to account.
Children looked after participate in decisions that affect their lives, and their views
are considered in the development of services. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is
fully consulted, established and influential, and is working to expand its membership.


Contents
The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates no childrens homes.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in May 2013. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since February 2012.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services, public health, leisure, arts, heritage
and libraries.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since April 2014.
 The functions that the local authority has delegated to a third-party provider are:
 Sutton Education Services (SES) Limited. This service began trading on 1
November 2016.
 The local authority commissions two services: the recruitment of foster carers;
and the interviews of children and young people when they return home from
going missing.

Children living in this area
 Approximately 46,190 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Sutton. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 14% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 11% (the national average is 15%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 13%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 30% of all
children living in the area, compared with 21% in the country as a whole.


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data when this was available.


 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian/British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 27% (the national average is 20%).
 in secondary schools is 22% (the national average is 16%).
Child protection in this area
 At 14 November 2016, 1,940 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from
 At 14 November 2016, 200 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 163 at 31 March 2016.
 At 14 November 2016, three children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is an increase from one at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, four serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted, and three serious case reviews (SCRs) have been completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At 14 November 2016, 224 children were being looked after by the local authority
(a rate of 48.5 per 10,000 children). This is a reduction from 230 (50 per 10,000
children) at 31 March 2016.
Of this number:
authority area
 three live in residential special schools,3 all of whom live out of the
authority area
 two live with parents, one of whom lives out of the authority area
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been nine adoptions


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


returned to be looked after
living
 three young people ceased to be looked after and are now living in
houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that services to care leavers are improved so that all personal advisers
adopt a proactive approach and take all reasonable steps to keep in touch with
all young people who have left care.


Ensure that young people have an up-to-date summary of their health history
when they leave care, to support them to access services to meet their needs.


Ensure that all care leavers are in suitable accommodation and that any risks to
their well-being are known and managed effectively.


Ensure that strategy discussions and meetings involve the full range of relevant
agencies, so that multi-agency information informs the assessment of risk and
that subsequent plans are routinely updated through regular core group activity
to demonstrate progress.


Ensure that assessments of need consistently take into account culture and
ethnicity, so that children receive services appropriate to their needs.


Ensure that all visits to children looked after comply with statutory
requirements so that all children are seen regularly, in the place where they live
and have the opportunity to speak to their social worker alone.


Increase the participation of children looked after and care leavers in the
Children in Care Council.


Ensure that the agency decision maker undertakes an annual appraisal of the
adoption panel chair and holds regular meetings with the chair to discuss the
quality of practice.


Implement a system so that findings from audits are systematically actioned
and senior managers regularly evaluate progress.

missing panel evidence that their collaboration reduces risk and that children
are safer as a result of their interventions.


Summary for children and young people
 Services for children and families in Sutton are good. Managers and councillors
are determined to improve the lives of children and young people, and do this
well.
 When children and families need help, they receive the right help at the right
time.
 Social workers spend time with children and their families to understand what life
is like for them and what worries them. This helps social workers to make the
right decisions for the children.
 Social workers, police officers, teachers, health workers and many others know
what is needed to make children safe in Sutton, and they act quickly together to
achieve this. Professionals are good at providing help to children who go missing
or who are at risk of sexual or gang exploitation.
 If children who have disabilities cannot talk very easily, the people who work with
them find imaginative ways to help them to express their views.
 Children and young people are helped to contribute to their plans and reviews,
and their views are listened to, to help to make services better.
 Social workers help children and young people to live at home with their families
if it is safe for them there. If a child or young person cannot live at home, social
workers find the right families for children and carers or other family members
support them to do well with their education and hobbies.
 If children and young people need extra help to talk about how they are feeling,
there are many services that can help them and their families.
 Suttons Children in Care Council works well, but the group needs to be bigger, so
that more children and young people can share their experiences to help to
improve services further.
 Young people who are leaving care usually receive the right support to help them
to prepare for independence, find a job or continue their learning. Managers are
trying hard to improve the service so that they keep in touch with all care leavers
and make sure that they have plans that help them to do well as adults.


The experiences and progress of
Good
children who need help and protection
Summary
Leaders and managers take effective action to help and protect most children and
young people and to keep them safe. Families benefit from a well-coordinated and
wide range of early help services, preventing harm and reducing the need for
statutory intervention. This is making a significant difference, as almost all children
and families receive the right help at the right time.
Help provided by childrens social care is proportionate to risk. When statutory
thresholds are met, a highly effective first response is provided through work
undertaken in the multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH). Managers provide good
oversight, sharing information effectively with co-located police officers and health
and education professionals, resulting in timely decisions and appropriate action to
protect children. However, strategy discussions in the referral and assessment
service (RAS) do not routinely include all relevant agencies.
Child and family assessments are comprehensive, and risk is analysed well. Care is
taken to ensure that the childs views and experiences inform decisions and
recommendations. Good-quality multi-agency child protection and children in need
plans clearly set out professional concerns and risks to children, so that parents
understand what needs to change. Plans are effectively reviewed, although not all
are updated, and robust action is taken to safeguard children if required. When
children are missing from home or when they may be at risk of sexual and gang
exploitation, they receive well-coordinated help and protection that reduce harm
and risk. Young people at risk of female genital mutilation receive effective help to
reduce risk. Those young people who present as homeless at 16- and 17-years-old
are helped to return home and, if they cannot, they are provided with suitable
accommodation or are cared for appropriately by the local authority.
Social workers see children regularly and work hard to ensure that they hear and
act on childrens views. Advocacy services provided for children, and separately for
parents, are helping them to contribute their views, wishes and feelings to
assessments and plans.
Strong multi-agency partnerships help to protect children from harm. There is a
good range of services that provide effective, direct work to support families when
there are issues of domestic violence and substance misuse, including alcohol and
drugs. This leads to improved outcomes for children and families.


Inspection findings
offer. Early help assessments are detailed, appropriately identify the needs of
children and families, and lead to specific actions that prevent escalation to
statutory services. Schools are significant partners in service provision and,
together with childrens social care services, ensure that team around the
family processes improve outcomes. At the time of the inspection, early help
assessments and access to service provision were primarily handled by the
family matters teams. The borough has recently relaunched its integrated and
strategic approach to early help that, in time, is expected to reduce referrals to
social care to obtain access to services.
specialist services. These include mentoring, advocacy and peer support for
young people, cognitive behavioural therapy that is provided and commissioned
through child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS), specific support
for building father and son relationships, mental health assessments for adults,
substance misuse counselling, and budget and debt support. Many services are
available to victims of domestic abuse, including refuges, freedom programmes
and Womens Aid. Services are also available for perpetrators. Local voluntary
organisations help women at risk of honour-based violence and forced
marriage. In many cases seen by inspectors, these services are making a
positive difference to outcomes for children and families, and they are
preventing a need for further statutory intervention. Many families (560)
benefited from early help intervention in 201516, an increase from 454 in
referred to statutory services. This demonstrates increasingly effective
intervention at an early stage.
appropriately. An effective MASH, resourced with staff including police and
health and education professionals, has access to early help services via an
early help coordinator. Decision making and responses are mostly timely and
are made within 24 hours. They are informed by a good use of history and
information gathered from other agencies. Interventions are proportionate to
risk and, when children need to be safeguarded, actions ensure that child
protection investigations are timely and thorough. However, strategy
discussions and meetings with partners mostly involve only the police and social
care and, as a result, potentially limit the full use of multi-agency information
available to inform assessment of risk at the earliest opportunity.
(Recommendation)
yet consistently recorded, and is more visible in the MASH and family matters
teams than in assessment teams. As a result, decision making is more difficult


to follow. Managers are taking steps to improve the quality of records in these
teams to demonstrate good and effective progress of work. Timely decisions to
step down or progress cases to further assessment ensure that families receive
appropriate responses to their needs.
presented to children through issues such as domestic violence and parental
substance misuse. Social workers have a good understanding of the
characteristics of neglect and the need to consider further intervention if
circumstances change. This includes a clear analysis of risk with relevant
recommendations for future action. The transfer of cases between teams is
mostly effective, and cases remain within team if it is assessed to be in the best
interests of children to complete the work to provide continuity.
and updated. However, actions and timescales are not sufficiently clear in a
small number of plans, making it harder to measure progress. In a few cases,
only one agency other than social care regularly attends planning meetings,
meaning that work with families and children is not always benefiting from the
range of possible multi-agency contributions available. However, work with
children in need benefits from co-location with youth offending teams and the
presence of a child psychologist, and a speech and language therapist provides
specialist help and guidance to families and social work staff.
with effective arrangements to ensure that they receive the most appropriate
service in relation to identified safeguarding issues. These include consideration
of the needs of other children in the family. Experienced and knowledgeable
staff undertake detailed assessments and use imaginative practice to build
relationships with non-verbal children and young people. Multi-agency working
is well developed and effective in helping to ensure that childrens complex
needs are met.
children are not subjected to these investigations unnecessarily. Child
protection assessments identify risks and plans effectively and have clear
actions with timescales to minimise those risks. Child protection plans clearly
identify the level of support to enable families to make changes. When positive
change is not taking place, managers use the Public Law Outline and preproceedings processes, including the use of care proceedings, to take further
action to safeguard children.
focused on improving compliance issues and is now addressing the quality of
social work practice. Almost all alerts are resolved satisfactorily and within
appropriate timescales. Child protection conferences are mostly timely. There
are regular reviews of children when child protection plans have been in place


for more than a year, and close monitoring of progress has resulted in very low
numbers of children remaining on plans for more than two years.
plans. For a small number of children, gaps in core group meetings have
resulted in some delays in updating child protection plans, although inspectors
did not see detriment to children as a result. Core groups have appropriate
multi-agency involvement and, in most cases seen, demonstrate progress in
reducing risk to children. (Recommendation)
gang exploitation receive well-coordinated help and protection that reduces
harm and risk. Effective and timely communication in the MASH means that
more children receive help early. This includes the monitoring of missing
children, reviewed daily by the police and in the MASH. Concerns and local
intelligence are routinely shared, which leads to an effective, collaborative
multi-agency response. Children appropriately progress to section 47 enquiries
and assessment if required. Examples seen of decisive action to remove
children from home to live out of the area demonstrate appropriate decisions to
reduce risk. Social workers understand the nature of risks arising from child
sexual exploitation, and use a framework effectively to help to measure the
reduction in risk. A commissioned service provides interviews to young people
who go missing from home on their return.
clearly evidence the views of children. An established advocacy service for
children aged eight years and over helps to ensure that their views are
represented at case conferences, and advocates have attended a high number
of conferences in the past year.
inconsistent. Inspectors saw some very good work, for example in the case of a
potential forced marriage, when the local authority recognised the risks and
acted quickly to safeguard the young person. However, these issues are not
always clearly recognised or taken into account in assessments and plans.
There is better work with young people who have a disability or behavioural
issues. (Recommendation)
and staff are proactive in tracing those children. The school attendance service
manager and staff take prompt action when children become missing, and
undertake all the necessary checks to establish their whereabouts, including
checking council tax records and any history of social care involvement with
families. They liaise effectively with other agencies when necessary to locate
children, such as with the traveller education service, other local authorities and
other professionals.


schools. Schools fund a safeguarding in education post, and all schools
complete an annual safeguarding review. Staff receive training in a wide range
of safeguarding issues, including female genital mutilation, risk of radicalisation
and the use of social media. Policies are available for schools, for example on
safe use of the internet. In the past year, the e-safety lead worked directly with
over 2,500 children and over 600 parents, helping children and parents to
recognise and understand risks associated with social media. Schools are aware
of and use the wide range of useful contact points should they have concerns
about a child's welfare, such as contact with the named senior practitioner, the
education adviser in the MASH and the safeguarding in education officer.
risk and those who pose risk. Positive impact on repeated domestic violence
incidents is evidenced by a reduction from 31% in 2015 to 26% this year, and
by an increase in referrals to MARAC from 167 in 2015 to 208 in the year to
November 2016. Offences of domestic violence that result in a formal sanction
are consistently high in Sutton, with up to 35% of all reported cases placed in
this category. Social care services have robust links with MAPPA and, in
examples seen, appropriate actions, including referral to the designated officer
when necessary, identify and manage risk.
assessing risk in relation to female genital mutilation. Actions and plans in all
cases seen were effective in safeguarding young women. There is a clear
referral pathway for mandatory reporting of actual female genital mutilation
and good awareness by professionals of the Local Safeguarding Children Board
reporting procedures.
appropriate accommodation when young people aged 16- and 17-years-old
present as homeless. They receive a thorough assessment of need, which may
result in efforts to effect a return home or a decision by the local authority to
provide care and accommodation.
cases have risen significantly, from 58 referrals in 201415 to 119 in 201516,
as a result of increased awareness across agencies. The doubling of referrals
has meant that completion timescales have fallen to 63% within a month and a
further 36% within three months, which is outside the Department for
Education timescales, although no detriment was seen to children in the cases
sampled by inspectors.
promote safeguarding against extremism and radicalisation. Referral pathways
are clear. The local authority has developed and disseminated a Sutton
Prevent duty roadmap which details the risks and the required professional


response. A comprehensive bespoke training and awareness-raising programme
was attended by 705 people in the past year, and 60 workshops to raise
awareness of the Prevent duty were delivered to staff in schools. Recent
referrals seen by inspectors demonstrate effective multi-agency work,
successfully safeguarding children and preventing concerns from escalating.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Children on the edge of care receive a range of good services that support them
to remain safely in the care of their families whenever possible. Decisions for
children to become looked after are timely and proportionate, and risk to those
children is effectively reduced as a result. When children return home, they receive
appropriate levels of support and good monitoring.
Emerging and continued risk for children looked after is recognised, and swift
action is taken to reduce it. This includes the risk of child sexual exploitation and
going missing from care. When risk is not reduced, managers take effective
protective measures to safeguard children.
Children have trusting and enduring relationships with social workers and people
who care for them. Foster carers demonstrate real warmth towards the children in
their care and take pride in their achievements. Almost all children live in good,
stable homes that meet their needs well, and their wishes and feelings influence
plans. Children receive a good range of services, including direct work, therapeutic
support and appropriate changes of environment that successfully reduce risk.
The timeliness of children looked after reviews and childrens participation is very
good. Almost all children and young people participate in their reviews in some
form, and their wishes and feelings are carefully considered and contribute to
decision making.
The virtual school is a strength, helping children to achieve to the best of their
abilities. When children looked after experience problems, the virtual school
intervenes effectively and works well with children, social workers, schools and
other professionals to respond to changing needs and circumstances.
Children who need adoption benefit from good planning and support. Prospective
adopters are assessed, trained and supported well, and the quality of postadoption support is good. As a result, children thrive in their adoptive families.
Services for care leavers require improvement. Not enough care leavers have
pathway plans, insufficient action is taken to re-engage young people when they
lose touch, and a very small minority do not live in safe and suitable
accommodation.
The Children in Care Council is fully consulted, established and influential, and is
working to expand its membership.


Inspection findings
effective in supporting children to remain in the care of their families when it is
safe for them to do so. Some children receive help through family group
conferencing, to secure appropriate alternative arrangements when they cannot
remain at home. A recently introduced pilot programme offers crisis
intervention in the evenings and at weekends, working intensively with parents
to assess and reduce risk. Early indications are that it is successfully reducing
the need for unplanned and emergency accommodation of children.
Regular legal planning meetings make appropriate and proportionate decisions.
The use of pre-proceedings letters is appropriate and timely. Progress was
regularly reviewed by senior managers in almost all cases seen and prevented
unnecessary delay. The percentage of children placed at home under
placement with parents regulations, at 1%, is very low. This demonstrates that
work undertaken within the PLO is sufficient to satisfy the court that, if children
do return home, it is safe for them to do so under a lesser order or no order at
all. This reduces anxiety and uncertainty for parents and children and, in a
small number of cases when there was delay, it was purposeful in achieving a
positive outcome for the child.
responded to well. This includes safeguarding issues and less immediate risks,
such as risk of placement breakdown, potential detriment to their emotional
health and risk of their not achieving to the best of their ability. As a result,
almost all children looked after live in stable homes that meet their needs,
based on a good understanding of strengths and risks. For a small minority of
children whose placements were not stable, this was due to the highly complex
needs of the young person, and managers actively and vigorously took
appropriate action to pursue alternatives.
children in their care and pride in their achievements. Most carers had a
positive experience of their own recruitment and have been involved in a
number of activities supporting current recruitment, including preparation
groups, mentoring and training. Recruitment of new foster carers is by a
commissioned provider and, to date, has not been as successful as the local
authority had anticipated. However, the local authority makes good use of
external providers. While the quality of child permanence reports and matching
reports is generally good, the quality of reports submitted to the fostering panel
by the commissioned provider is more variable. The panel fulfils its quality
assurance role assiduously and this, combined with the support that the local
authority has offered to the provider to improve standards, means that the
quality of reports on prospective foster carers is improving.


homes that meet their individual needs well. This relentless focus on quality of
provision has resulted in a dramatic improvement in short-term placement
stability in the past 12 to 18 months. In 201415, 14% of children looked after
had three or more placements. In 201516, according to local authority data,
this was reduced to 4%. At the time of the inspection, the 201617 figure to
date was also at 4%. Children feel settled and safe with their foster carers.
There are insufficient local foster carers or residential places to meet the needs
of all children looked after by Sutton. However, at the time of the inspection,
there were no children separated from their brothers and sisters unless it was
assessed as in their best interests, and no children were living in residential
settings due to a shortage of foster homes.
sexual exploitation are robust, based on a detailed assessment of risk, balanced
with protective factors. Children receive a good range of services, including
direct work, therapeutic support and sometimes a change of environment,
which are successfully reducing risk and helping them to recognise their own
vulnerabilities. When risk does not reduce, managers take protective measures,
including, when appropriate, use of secure accommodation. However, in a
minority of cases, the recording of return home interviews is not consistently
good, which limits a comprehensive understanding and analysis of motivating
factors, patterns or triggers to improve planning and reduce risk. Managers are
aware and are taking steps to address this.
is a strength. While there has been historical turnover of staff in the children
looked after service, this has stabilised in the past year. Caseloads are
manageable and workers spend time getting to know children, using a variety
of methods including direct work. Almost all children have been able to form
positive, trusting relationships with their current social workers. Children are
routinely seen, and good efforts are made to hear and represent their views.
Inspectors saw some excellent work in which childrens views appropriately
influenced planning, for example in relation to contact, changes of carer and
even holiday destinations. When children do not wish to express their views, an
independently commissioned advocacy service represents their views well,
although the current take-up of this is low.
requirements in relation to statutory visits, as some of these visits do not take
place at the childs home and, in some cases, the child is not seen alone. In a
recent survey by the Children in Care Council (CiCC), a small number of children
who responded reported that they did not have the opportunity for a private
conversation with their social worker. This does not enable children and young
people to speak confidentially to their social worker and reduces the
opportunity for social workers to assess them in their living environment.
(Recommendation)


journey. The virtual school headteacher and team maintain a good overview of
childrens and young peoples progress and attainment. When children looked
after experience problems, the virtual school staff intervene and work well with
children, social workers, schools and other professionals to respond to changing
needs and circumstances. The quality of planning for childrens education is
good, with nearly all children looked after having a good-quality, detailed and
up-to-date personal education plan. This is an improvement from the last
inspection.
particularly those at key stage 2 and key stage 4, although provisional data for
special educational needs taking GCSEs. Staff at the virtual school link well with
colleges and other providers to ensure that young people make a smooth
transition from Year 11 to Year 12, with 83% of those leaving Year 11 in 2016
maintaining their education place at the end of the autumn term 2016.
from the additional support funded by the pupil premium grant. The grant is
used effectively to build childrens self-confidence and support their academic
progress. The virtual school and others support children well to develop their
wider interests and hobbies. For example, the number of children having tuition
to play a musical instrument has increased significantly during the past year.
attend school regularly, and their attendance overall is improving. Early
intervention by the virtual school means that there have been no permanent
exclusions of children looked after in recent years. Children who are educated
outside of the area receive a good level of effective support from the virtual
school. The virtual school team is extending the support that it offers to
children in the early years foundation stage to those placed for adoption and to
young people who are leaving care.
assessments is a priority for the local authority. Concerted efforts to improve
performance have had some positive results, but this is not yet consistent. In
the first two quarters of 201617, 75% of children did not receive an
assessment of their health needs within statutory timescales, meaning that
childrens health needs are not recognised and responded to as quickly as they
should be. However, for children seen at this inspection, this did not delay
access to timely primary healthcare.
children completing strengths and difficulties questionnaires (SDQs), a
behavioural screening questionnaire. The most recently reported figures of 76%
for 201516 represent an improvement of 11% on the previous year, and
managers are taking appropriate action to increase completion rates still


further. The quality of SDQs seen by inspectors was good, and a recently
introduced policy in which the child, school and carers complete them,
providing a holistic view of the childs needs, is good practice. As a result, SDQs
are increasingly effective in identifying those children who would benefit from
additional help.
timely and child-focused service. The children looked after therapies service,
co-located with the children looked after team, supports foster carers, social
workers and residential workers when appropriate. Recently integrated with
CAMHS, this seamless service for children provides the right service at the right
time. As a response to feedback from children, a recently introduced online
counselling service is showing early indications of success in reaching children
who find it more difficult to engage.
includes sensitive responses to their needs arising from their cultural heritage
and ethnicity. Work with unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, for example,
ensures that they receive timely and appropriate support to match their cultural
needs and to help them to adjust to an alien and potentially bewildering
culture. Other identity needs arising from childrens individual circumstances,
such as their stage of development, the impact of educational needs or their
complex family backgrounds, are also often recognised and responded to
effectively.
are routinely updated, and this is good practice. Stronger assessments contain
a clear analysis of childrens lived experiences. A small number are insufficiently
detailed, lack robust analysis and are not updated to reflect changes in the
childs circumstances. While most care planning is good, written plans do not
always reflect all of the work undertaken and often lack timescales, making it
difficult to measure progress over time or hold agencies and families to
account. Prior to this inspection, managers had identified the quality of written
plans as an area for improvement through their own analysis of the service,
although it is too recent to see any impact on practice.
reviews are very good. Almost all children participate in their reviews in some
form, and their wishes and feelings are carefully considered and contribute to
decision making. In most cases, the review process is effective, and minutes of
review meetings are comprehensive and focused on children. Independent
reviewing officers (IROs) maintain contact with children and social workers in
between reviews through midpoint checks. However, quality assurance of
practice, both within and between reviews, while increasing, does not yet
consistently result in positive change. This reduces the overall effectiveness of
an otherwise rigorous review process. Managers recognise that, while firm
foundations are in place, more work needs to be done to ensure the speedy
resolution of all issues raised by IROs.


for a large number of children (51) who are living in their permanent home, the
plan for them to remain with their current carers is still to be formally agreed at
panel. Although this could cause uncertainty for some children and carers, this
was not seen in cases sampled by inspectors. Increasing numbers of children
are benefiting from permanence achieved through special guardianship orders
(SGOs). A very small number of foster carers report that a lack of clarity about
the support available to them under an SGO is causing delay in deciding
whether this is the right option for them and the children in their care. This is a
missed opportunity, as there is a wide range of good, tailored support available,
including continued social work support if needed.
membership is not currently representative of all children looked after. In the
recent survey undertaken by the CiCC, two thirds of the 48 children who
responded had not heard of it. This demonstrates that the CiCC requires further
significant support from the local authority to develop and represent the views
of all children looked after. (Recommendation)
range of leisure and sporting activities. The local authority celebrates the
achievements of children looked after well through an annual award ceremony
that, this year, was designed, planned and hosted by the children themselves.
This makes children feel valued, increases their confidence and teaches
valuable skills to those involved in organising the event.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good
strength in Sutton. There have been 10 adoption orders made each year over
the past four years, with six adoption orders made since 1 April 2016 and a
further eight expected by 31 March 2017. Numbers of children subject to SGOs
have markedly increased since 201415, demonstrating that permanence is a
priority for Sutton. The quality of preparation of adopters is good, as is the
quality of adoption support. This means that children benefit from a stable,
permanent family.
resulted in senior managers having good oversight through regular tracking,
permanence planning and family finding meetings. These tracking and
monitoring systems are having a positive impact, as children who have come
into care within the past 18 months are being placed for adoption in a timely
way. The adoption service is stable, with experienced workers led well by an
ambitious and knowledgeable head of adoption and permanence.


decisions and plans. Adopters and voluntary adoption agencies spoken to by
inspectors all said that they receive comprehensive information about children
and are fully involved in discussions about matches and introductions. Children
are well prepared for adoption. Carefully and sensitively completed adoption
support plans are providing good information to adopters about children, which
lead to well-planned introductions. Life-story books are more variable. While
they are child centred and contain many photographs, they do not all provide
information about the childs new family. Managers have already recognised the
quality of life-story books as an area for improvement. Later-life letters are
written in a clear and honest way, and provide a sensitive account of the childs
history. There is an established system for coordinating the post box for indirect
contact.
does not meet the government threshold, and the time between receiving court
authority to place a child and deciding on a match with an adoptive family is
longer than government expectations. However, in both cases, this is due to
the tenacity of the local authority in identifying families for older children and
those who have complex needs, and inspectors saw many examples of these
children being successfully placed for adoption.
the quality of communication, engagement, training and support provided by
the local authority. Prospective adopter reports are insightful and are
particularly strong in the areas of diversity and identity when assessing those
from minority ethnic backgrounds and same-sex couples.
shared recruitment plan with a focus on increasing the numbers of adopters for
older children and family groups, based on an analysis of the numbers, needs
and profiles of children. At the time of the inspection, there were seven
adopters approved, five of whom were considering matches. The average time
that adopters wait for a match has reduced from four to two months over the
past 18 months. The authority refers to the adoption register after three
months if there is no match. Childrens anonymised profiles are advertised
nationally during care proceedings, minimising delay. There have been no
foster-to-adopt placements in Sutton, and there is no specific policy, although
all potential adopters are asked whether they would consider this.
for adopters and children who need them. A range of established post-adoption
support groups are provided by the consortium for adults and children. This
includes a group for adopted children focused on play, facilitated by a therapist,
to help children to make sense of their experience and to enhance attachment
to their adopters. There is no recent evaluation of the impact of this work,
although there have been no reported adoption disruptions in the past two


years. Over and above the variety of support services available for adopters
and children who need them, the local authority makes appropriate and timely
referrals to the adoption support fund for additional specific therapeutic
interventions for children and their parents, if this is their assessed need.
demonstrates effective oversight of adoption decisions and the approval of
adopters. Feedback from adopters who have attended the panel is positive. The
agency decision maker is suitably qualified and experienced, and meets with
the adoption panel adviser routinely each month, and flexibly, to consider
childrens needs in a timely way. The adoption panel provides challenge when
required and reports to the authority every six months on the quality of
practice. However, the agency decision maker does not meet routinely with the
adoption panel chair, and the chair has not had an appraisal for two years,
which means that the panel chair is not being held to account effectively.
(Recommendation)

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it requires improvement
However, the quality of help and support for young people leaving care is not
consistently good enough.
to make a successful transition to adulthood. Staff provide well-considered
advice and guidance. However, a small minority of young people are not in
touch with the service and personal advisers are not proactive in trying to reach
them. In these instances, the responsibility is placed on young people to keep
in touch and, as a result, personal advisers and their managers do not have an
up-to-date understanding of these vulnerable young people, their needs or
circumstances. (Recommendation)
of plans varies too much and does not reflect the ambitions that managers and
staff have for young people leaving care. Target setting is too often not specific
enough, and sections of some plans are incomplete. The new management
team completed a thorough audit of pathway planning in September 2016 and
has put in place an effective action plan to improve the timeliness and quality of
pathway planning so that young peoples specific needs are assessed,
understood and met.
example, the recent health awareness month included a mixture of healthrelated events and activities. Young people who did not have up-to-date dental


checks benefited from a dentist and dental hygienist on site. They took part in
workshops on contraception, sexual health, consent and healthy relationships.
Healthy lifestyles are promoted by having free fruit available in the teams
reception area and free weekly yoga sessions. The children looked after nurse
attends the centre each week and is available to young people and staff for
advice and support. However, not enough young people who became 18 years
old in the last 12 months have an up-to-date health history, and only
approximately a quarter of young people have an up-to-date health summary.
(Recommendation)
people well. In most cases, the risks to young people are known, and social
workers and personal advisers plan effectively to manage and reduce these
risks. They understand their current needs and circumstances, and offer good
support when young people experience day-to-day difficulties, or advise on the
next steps that they need to take in their education or training. Nearly all young
people live in safe and suitable accommodation. Young people spoken to told
inspectors that they feel safe where they live. Managers recognise that they
need to increase the availability of semi-independent social housing and to
promote foster care better as an option for those young people aged over 18
years.
small number of young people aged over 18 years who live in bed and
breakfast accommodation and in one house in multiple occupancy. While these
young people have refused alternative housing options, staff from the leaving
care team have not visited the young people and therefore have a limited
understanding of the quality of the provision. Senior managers took decisive
action during the inspection to ensure that young people do not live in bed and
breakfast accommodation as a response to their housing needs.
(Recommendation)
the United Kingdom as unaccompanied asylum-seeking young people. They are
quickly provided with accommodation that meets their cultural and religious
needs well. For example, they live with carers of a similar cultural background
and are supported well to attend their local mosque or church. Education
placements help young people to develop their spoken and written English skills
quickly, and these young people make good progress in their learning.
employment adviser, and the virtual school provide effective support that helps
young people to secure education, training and employment that reflect their
career aspirations. Current local data shows that a good proportion of care
leavers are in education, employment and training (EET). Of the 190 young
people aged 16 years or over, approximately three quarters are in EET, which is
an improving proportion. Published data in March 2015 for young people aged


training (NEET), which is similar to England averages. The EET worker and
personal advisers are providing good support, in most cases, to encourage
more young people to engage in purposeful activity.
progress to higher education and provides good financial support for them.
Eighteen care leavers are currently attending university. A range of practical
workshops provide young people with help to write their curriculum vitae, gain
interview skills and attend short courses to build their self-confidence. As a
result, some young people have secured further work experience or access to
skills-based training.
particularly in relation to their education. Staff help young people to explore
their options for their next steps in education and provide them with
equipment, such as laptops, to help them to complete their coursework. The
local authority has identified that work to expand the number of
apprenticeships for care leavers is underdeveloped, and it is taking action to
increase opportunities. Care leavers are aware of and in receipt of their basic
entitlements, such as college bursaries, transport costs and the setting up
home grant. Young people spoken to said that they have a trusting and positive
relationship with their personal advisers and social workers, who know them
well, keep in touch with them regularly, and are interested and encouraging
about their progress.
to manage their finances, budget effectively and, in some cases, manage debt.
Personal advisers act as effective advocates for young people, for example by
negotiating with energy suppliers about their outstanding debt. Workshops
delivered by the leaving care team aim to develop young peoples independent
living skills. Foster carers and key workers use an independent skills checklist to
support young people in developing the necessary skills that they need to
manage independently.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The senior leadership team and elected members in Sutton are committed and
ambitious, and have a clear vision for service improvement, with many of the
essential components in place to ensure further progress. Leaders and managers
have worked relentlessly since previous inspections to strengthen the workforce.
The appointments of permanent heads of service have brought an
uncompromising focus on improving the quality of frontline social work practice.
This has made a discernible difference. As a result, a child or young person in
Sutton is more likely than a year ago to have regular visits, to receive effective
help if they are at risk of harm and to receive good-quality care if they are unable
to live with their parents. However, staff are not proactive enough in keeping in
touch with those care leavers who are less willing to engage, resulting in the
service not knowing the circumstances and risks to this group.
Weekly performance meetings, led by senior staff, are bringing effective challenge
to practice, holding first- and second-line managers to account for monitoring and
improving social work practice, so that all services for children and young people
will be consistently good enough. Clear expectations to do the right thing are
making children in Sutton safer. While a wide range of routine and tailored
auditing activity is scrutinised by senior leaders, an integrated system for
implementing change and routinely reviewing impact is not sufficiently strong.
The recently launched early help strategy builds on work undertaken previously,
effectively drawing on the ethos of a multi-agency targeted approach.
Partnerships in Sutton are strong, leading to the majority of children and young
people in need of help and protection receiving an effective and prompt response
from a wide range of commissioned services, readily accessible in both targeted
and specialist teams.
The corporate parenting forum (CPF) is developing effectively, supported by a
knowledgeable and experienced lead member. A high number of children looked
after attend good or better schools in Sutton, proactively supported by the virtual
headteacher.
Most children missing from home and care and those at risk of sexual and gang
exploitation receive well-coordinated help and protection that reduce harm and
risk. The revised monthly operational child sexual and missing MASE panel does
not currently evaluate whether agencies know whether children are safer as a
result of the help that they are receiving.


Inspection findings
elected members are very aware of the detrimental impact of an unstable
workforce on the quality of support to children and young people. Since 2013,
they have worked relentlessly to strengthen the workforce and have placed a
significant emphasis on becoming a learning organisation, ensuring that lessons
learned from serious case reviews (SCRs) and complaints improve practice.
Heads of service rightly focus on improving the quality of frontline practice to
create a supportive and stable environment for social work to thrive. Clear
expectations to do the right thing are making Sutton children safer.
in reducing a previous heavy reliance on agency staff. A range of initiatives,
including the development of a newly qualified social worker academy and a
successful overseas recruitment campaign, have begun to stabilise the
workforce and have resulted in a significant reduction in agency staff from 37%
in 201516 to a projected 23% by January 2017. The information on why staff
leave is used effectively to prevent attrition. For example, increased resources
to reduce caseloads to less than 20 children and the co-location of social work
teams are improving morale. As a result, a vulnerable child living is Sutton is
more likely than a year ago to be visited regularly, to be listened to by the
same social worker, and to receive the appropriate level of help and protection.
This is leading to positive changes for most children and their families.
challenge to practice, holding first- and second-line managers to account for
monitoring and improving social work practice, so that all services for children
are consistently good enough. In some instances, action to respond to the
findings of audits has been slow. For example, delays were found in the multiagency safeguarding hub (MASH) in February 2016, but action to reduce delay
was not taken until September 2016. (Recommendation)
opportunities that effectively promote integrated working to support children,
young people and families. Expectations and standards are high, and assertive
action is taken to manage staff who fall below those standards. Most social
workers are tenacious in their efforts to engage with children and families in
most parts of the service. Recent robust and considered action has been taken
by senior managers to address deficits in the care leavers service. However,
this has not yet resulted in good enough management and delivery of help and
support to this vulnerable group. A well-structured pathway for social workers
to access the assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE) has seen
eight newly qualified social workers successfully completing their ASYE in
December 2016. The recording of supervision is of variable quality, despite a
large investment in training. In better case files, in which the strengthening
families model is used, there is clarity about risks, with a better focus on the
childs lived experience. Leaders recognise this as an area for further


development, and the training and development strategy has appropriate focus
on improving management analysis and reflective supervision.
Sutton. The CPF is developing effectively, supported by a knowledgeable and
experienced lead member. A high number of children looked after attend good
or better schools in Sutton, proactively supported by the virtual headteacher.
The chair ensures that the board focuses on improving outcomes, for example
the timeliness of health and dental assessments, and has raised issues with
partners about poor performance. Placement stability for children is mostly
good, although the quality and support to care leavers varies. In Sutton, the
established and influential Children in Care Council (CiCC) is working to expand
its membership. Members and senior officers recognise that apprenticeships for
care leavers are underdeveloped.
arrangements between highly committed elected members, the Local
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) chair, the DCS and the chief executive are
in line with statutory guidance, and are subject to appropriate and formal
governance protocols, so that officers are held to account. Links between the
Health and Wellbeing Board, public health, the Childrens Trust and Sutton
Safer Partnerships boards are strong, leading to well-defined and shared
safeguarding priorities. The joint strategic needs assessment (JSNA) is focused
on the needs of local children and young people, and leads to shared
understanding and priorities, for example the investment in services for children
in Sutton who have emotional difficulties. Key overarching strategies and plans
are of good quality, and objectives and priorities align so that when resources
need to be reduced to make savings, for example the reduction in the number
of children centres, careful consideration is given to limiting the likely impact on
vulnerable children.
on both the children looked after needs analysis and the JSNA, informed by
learning from SCRs and the views of children, young people, parents and
carers. Timely action in response to service deficiencies or new demands
ensures that a wide range of services are available and readily accessible in
both early help and specialist settings. These include cognitive behavioural
counselling, help for parents who have drug and alcohol problems or those
affected by domestic violence. Contracts with providers are subject to robust
safeguarding quality assurance processes that include routine monitoring and
review, in collaboration with frontline social workers and their managers.
exploitation or radicalisation receive well-coordinated help and protection that
reduce harm and risk. A designated data analyst, in post since April 2016, has
significantly improved the quality of analysis and understanding of the profile of
victims and perpetrators. For example, 70% of missing episodes link to


children at risk of sexual exploitation. Effective use of technology to map, track,
and disrupt perpetrators is successfully identifying local areas where children
congregate and are at risk. Community police, the local authority sexual
exploitation lead officer, schools and staff in alternative education provision are
actively involved in monitoring vulnerable children in these areas. The revised
monthly operational MASE panel does not currently ensure that agencies
routinely evaluate whether children are safer as a result of the help that they
are receiving. (Recommendation)
Almost all children participate in their reviews. Their wishes and feelings are
carefully considered and contribute to decision making. Advocates and
independent visitors are available to support children looked after and those
subject to child protection plans to make representation at meetings or to raise
complaints. Young people in Sutton are consulted in developing CAMHS
services, and are the largest group involved in service development in south
west London. They have been involved in delivery of webinars with a non-profit
organisation in response to the CAMHS counselling offer. Their views are acted
on, and they influence ways in which services are delivered. Changes have
been made to services as a result. For example, online counselling is now
available for hard-to-reach young people.
support service (Cafcass), the family courts and the local family justice board
(FJB). The local authoritys timeliness for the duration of care proceedings is
improving, now at 32 weeks, effectively reducing delay for children and young
people. The joint delivery of training by the LSCB and the FJB is as a result of
findings from a high-profile SCR. Sutton is an active partner, financially
contributing to the development of the South London Family Drug and Alcohol
Court (FDAC), which will be operational from April 2017. The FDAC will be part
of a study to prevent repeat applications from families that have features of
drugs and alcohol misuse.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good

Executive summary
The Local Safeguarding Children Board in Sutton is well led by an independent
chair, who, since her arrival in 2014, has brought a rigorous focus to safeguarding
vulnerable children. The board, actively supported by the multi-agency partnership
and local political leaders, has established clear priorities. These combined factors
have resulted in continuous improvement, with explicit evidence of agencies being
held to account for delivering good outcomes.
The findings of multi-agency audits lead to action plans and improvements being
swiftly implemented. For example, a review of the multi-agency threshold
document culminated in relaunching the early help strategy, ensuring that most
children receive appropriate targeted help that prevents harm from escalating.
Findings from multi-agency and section 11 audits completed in the past 12 months
demonstrate effective challenge of poor safeguarding practice in a number of
priority areas. As a result of interventions by the board, inspectors found stronger
recent multi-agency practice in the multi-agency safeguarding hub and in the
provision of services to protect children at risk of sexual and gang exploitation and
those missing from home and care. A good understanding of radicalisation and
female genital mutilation has led the board to adopt a comprehensive model with
which to identify and monitor the impact of work likely to affect these groups of
children.
In the past year, the board has published three serious case reviews, including
that of Child D, a case that received much national media attention. The board has
undertaken an extensive range of work to ensure that the learning reaches
practitioners, managers and leaders, and improves practice. Recurring and
important themes from individual reviews, collated into a heat map, help to
identify visually the learning points, and these form actions in a delivery plan for
individual sub-groups to oversee. Findings have led to increased specific
commissioned services, for example integrated services to support young people
who have emotional difficulties.
While the boards annual report for 2015 demonstrates an awareness and critique
of its own performance, it does not offer a rigorous and transparent evaluation of
general safeguarding practice across the partnership.


Recommendations
a comprehensive evaluation of a range of safeguarding activity across agencies,
which clearly identifies the areas for improvement.

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board
are effective. A strong, credible, well-respected chair has engendered a culture
of openness, honesty and robust challenge, relentlessly driving significant
safeguarding improvements across the partnership. An example of challenge
leading to improvement is in the MASH, where the board has continuously
challenged all partners to ensure improvements in practice. The most recent
challenge has led to changes in management arrangements and the
introduction of an information sharing protocol. Multi-agency audits of work
within the MASH have demonstrated that work is showing steady improvement.
Challenge within the board and the resulting action are clearly recorded in the
minutes of both the main board and the sub-groups.
lead member for childrens services and the DCS, and they hold each other to
account for progress on identified areas for improvement. The board works well
with other strategic partnerships, providing challenge to the Health and
Wellbeing Board, the Childrens Trust Board, the Safer Sutton Partnership and
the Safeguarding Adults Board to provide priority planning for children.
Responsibilities and accountabilities are clear. For example, the Childrens Trust
has responsibility for operational implementation of the framework for children
who have disabilities and the early help strategy.
involved in the board and its seven sub-groups, undertaking work effectively in
key development areas. This includes a human resources sub-group, which has
helped organisations to include children and young people in the recruitment
process. Many positions in childrens social care and health organisations now
include young people in the selection of staff. The human resources sub-group
has worked to improve workforce stability, and this has been especially
effective in childrens social care. The LSCB chair has regular joint meetings
with the chairs of the sub-groups to ensure that work is progressing and to
maintain joint responsibility for actions across the partnership. Business support
for the board is effective and leads to good coordination across the sub-groups.
The board receives financial contributions from the relevant key agencies,
ensuring that appropriate reserves are available so that any unforeseen
expenses, such as SCRs, are adequately resourced.


updates that are scrutinised and challenged by the quality assurance sub-group
before consideration at the board. A good example of effective challenge
leading to a positive outcome was the improvement of general practitioners
involvement in child protection conferences. This has risen from 9% to a
current level of 42%, with a target of 70%.
provides narrative to accompany and explain the information. The board
continues to work with partners to develop the dataset further and to offer
regular challenge. An example of this is data relating to young people who go
missing, in which discrepancies between the different organisations led to the
introduction of a weekly triangulation meeting. This provides an opportunity for
organisations to compare data to ensure that it is consistent and robust. The
quality assurance sub-group has started to interrogate the data thematically by
organisation, on a rolling basis, to ensure its accuracy, and this is leading to
improvements in the quality of data provided. This means that the board has a
better understanding of strengths and areas for improvement to continue to
challenge partner agencies.
scrutinised by the quality assurance sub-group, which develops action plans
that swiftly lead to improvements. For example, the recent audit into children
looked after who have moved multiple times led to the implementation of a
stop the clock approach. A risk-planning meeting ensures that professionals
think cooperatively and creatively before the child moves. Workshops to share
lessons learned have ensured that staff are aware of the new approach. As a
result, two cases highlighted recently for risk-planning meetings involved a
range of agencies that attended to identify, manage and share risk.
their returns. There is a good level of analysis and scrutiny of the returns, with
appropriate challenge when there is a lack of evidence. Partner agencies
prioritise safeguarding and ensure that voluntary and community groups are
fully aware of their responsibilities. The board has commissioned a community
engagement officer to raise awareness, as well as to gather the views of
community members. This helps these partner organisations to make sure that
they meet the section 11 standards to improve the quality of safeguarding
practice across the partnership.
authority, is commissioned through that authoritys clinical commissioning
group. However, board members identified that this did not fully meet the
needs of Sutton. The board has taken the decision to de-commission the panel
and develop a stand-alone CDOP from January 2017. Since the summer, a
parallel process has been in place to ensure a successful transition, and this is
working well.


case that received much national media attention. The board has undertaken
an extensive range of work to ensure that identified learning reaches
practitioners, managers and leaders. The chair and the report author have
highlighted the national implications. All sub-groups have been involved in
implementing the learning to ensure that practice improves as a result. For
example, this has led to an offer to headteachers of supervision and support, to
enable them to deal with particularly challenging parents.
individual reviews into a heat map to help visualise the learning points and
inform a delivery plan for individual sub-groups to oversee. This has enabled
improvements in practice, for example ensuring routine enquiry in relation to
domestic violence in health settings. Individual reviews also inform practice
changes. For example, following the SCR on Child E, the review panel
recommended a need to improve health assessments in terms of cultural and
identity issues. An audit undertaken to assess impact has led to the
development of training planned for January 2017. A further re-audit in July
established a MASE strategic sub-group to oversee this work, leading to
significant improvements over the past 12 months. The appointment of a child
sexual exploitation and missing children data analyst is improving local
intelligence of risk areas. Data about where children go missing, where child
sexual exploitation incidents occur and the location of incidents of domestic
violence provides infographic representations of hotspots and areas of concern.
This enables the LSCB to understand the prevalence of the issue in Sutton and
helps individual partners to make improvements. The board has a good
understanding of other vulnerabilities, such as radicalisation and female genital
mutilation. A comprehensive model for identifying and responding to female
genital mutilation is due to be launched in February 2017. The model, piloted in
a maternity hospital, has led to an increase in referrals and in the provision of
specialist support for adult victims.
strong focus on understanding the views of children. The board sought views of
children and young people in the development of the business plan. It has
commissioned a part-time young peoples engagement officer to assist with
this, and young people were involved in the recruitment process for this post.
The board has developed a video of a young person talking about her
experiences of being homeless, which now forms part of the LSCB missing
training. The voices of children and families influence service development. For
example, community health services have developed an app which allows
immediate confidential feedback to be gathered when they visit families. This
has led to changes that make services more accessible for parents, such as
moving the provision of baby clinics to childrens centres.


all practitioners who work with children, including voluntary and community
organisations. The training, informed by learning from SCRs as well as national
and local policy developments, is evaluated immediately following the event
and at three- and six-monthly intervals to assess the impact on practice. Online
training is also available to all partner organisations, and this is increasing the
number of voluntary and community organisations that access training.
population information. The business plan and work stream plan are based on
the priorities identified in the report. While the boards annual report 2015
demonstrates an awareness and critique of its own performance, it does not
offer a rigorous and transparent evaluation of general safeguarding practice
across the partnership. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted and one additional inspector.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Marcie Taylor
Deputy lead inspector: Brenda McLaughlin
Team inspectors: Peter McEntee, Tara Geere, Shirley Bailey, Jon Bowman, Anji
Parker, Mandy Nightingale
Additional inspector: Andy Smith
Shadow inspector: Linda Bond
Senior data analyst: Judith Swindell
Quality assurance manager: Carolyn Adcock


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for looked after
children, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


