Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the local safeguarding children
board1
Inspection date: 27 January 2015  18 February 2015
Report published: 12 May 2015
The overall judgement is that childrens services are good
The local authority leads effective services that meet the requirements for good.
It is Ofsteds expectation that, as a minimum, all children and young people receive
good help, care and protection.2
The judgements on areas of the service that contribute to overall effectiveness are:

Good

permanence

Good


Good


Outstanding


Outstanding


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspection Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.
A full description of what the inspection judgements mean can be found at the end of this report.


Contents
The local authority


Summary of findings


What does the local authority need to improve?


The local authoritys strengths


Progress since the last inspection


Summary for children and young people


Information about this local authority area


Inspection judgements about the local authority

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Summary of findings


What does the LSCB need to improve?


Inspection judgement about the LSCB


What the inspection judgements mean


The local authority


The LSCB


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Summary of findings
Childrens services in Trafford are good because:
Leadership, management and governance
 Outcomes for children are at least good, and are outstanding for care leavers.
Children and young people express a high level of satisfaction with the help and
support they receive and they are encouraged to do well. There is a strong
commitment to promoting the voice of the child, which is helping to influence the
shape of services which are consistently good.
 Ambition and prioritisation of services for vulnerable children and their families is
given the highest importance. There are many examples of innovation, hard work
and determination demonstrated by elected members, officers and workers at all
levels to ensure that vulnerable children and families get the best possible
service.
 Managers are proactive and when areas for development are identified, take
robust action to secure improvement. The local authority is striving for excellence
and continuous improvement, delivered through well-planned change
programmes.

Partnership working
 Thresholds for access to service are clear, understood and applied consistently,
so children and young people get the right level of service in a timely way.
Partnership work is highly effective, underpinned by a fully integrated service
delivery model, so families receive a holistic response to meet their needs.
 There is a wide range of integrated early help services which are sharply focused
on meeting the needs of children and families early, characterised by the
effective work with those engaged with the Troubled Families programme and
those children on the edge of care.
 Schools make a strong contribution to safeguarding children and they have high
aspirations for looked after children. There is good use of the pupil premium,
underpinned by access to good quality education which is closing the attainment
gap for this vulnerable group of children.

Quality of practice
 Children in need (CiN) are effectively prioritised, needs are met early, and risks
reduced safely, so they do not enter the child protection system unnecessarily.
 The quality of social work practice is good. Social workers know children well and
the voice of the child is highly valued, leading to assessments that are generally
good and planned interventions that make a discernible difference.


What does the local authority need to improve?
There are no priority or immediate actions.
Areas for improvement

Permanence planning for children

Ensure delay is eliminated for prospective adopters at stages one and two of
the recruitment process.

Assessment, planning and participation

Ensure that plans always include clear and measurable objectives and
timescales to inform the work of core groups, so that progress can be closely
monitored and evaluated.


Ensure that children who are subject to the child protection process have
access to a suitable independent advocate if they want one, to help them make
their views known and understood to inform decisions about their life.


Improve the timeliness of the initial response to complaints about childrens
services so that issues are resolved for children and families at an early stage
and cases do not escalate unnecessarily to stages one and two of the formal
process.


Ensure that full consideration is given to all aspects of equality and diversity as
part of the assessment and planning process so that the individual needs of
children are met comprehensively.


Ensure that all looked after children who can benefit from an independent
visitor have access to this provision so that there is a special adult who sees
them routinely to support their development.

The local authoritys strengths

The Director of Childrens Services (DCS) and the multi-agency leadership team
have implemented a highly effective programme of change, including a
formalised Section 75 Agreement (NHS Act 2006) under which pooled budget
arrangements have maximised the use of available resources. This underpins
the delivery of a fully integrated, high quality, multi-agency service for children
and families.


Workforce planning is strong. Leaders and managers have effectively created
an extremely stable and positive environment for social work to flourish.
Recruitment of experienced, well-trained social workers is successful and highly
competitive, and retention rates are very good.



The local authority is an outward facing organisation that has a very good track
record of making the best use of learning drawn from a range of activities, such
as peer reviews, which has helped to sustain good quality service delivery over
time and to drive improvement in known areas for development.

performance management and quality assurance systems and a wide range of
routine and bespoke audit activity that is closely scrutinised, leading to good
action planning. There is a strong culture of well-planned, incremental change
which builds on success.
the design of services, and the political and strategic leadership of the local
authority is committed to these principles; childrens views are listened to,
taken seriously and acted on.
performance across a broad education agenda is building resilience, supporting
academic success and making a strong contribution to childrens ability to
safeguard themselves.
exemplary use of a specialist independent reviewing officer (IRO) to oversee
and chair reviews of these cases is making a significant difference to improving
outcomes for children.
assessed early to inform decisions. Swift action is taken to protect children
through the child protection system and to support children and families who
need a service but do not meet the threshold for access to statutory services.
and they receive outstanding support, which is delivered with great sensitivity
and persistence by youth workers. Inspectors spoke with a number of young
people who are at risk because of missing episodes or exposure to possible or
actual sexual exploitation. They all said that their lives would have been much
worse without this support and that it has helped them to protect themselves
from serious harm.
supporting effective work with children and young people. The vast majority of
looked after children live in close proximity to Trafford, where they receive all
the support they need so that they enjoy stability as they grow-up.
so their needs are comprehensively met and they feel well prepared for
adulthood.


Progress since the last inspection
Traffords services for looked after children was in May 2010. The local
authority was judged to be good.
authority provision as good. The last inspection of the fostering services was in
June 2011 and judged local authority provision as good.
recommendations from the previous inspections have been addressed to ensure
that improvement is made and good performance is sustained across all the key
judgement areas. Services are making a demonstrable difference to improve
the lives of children and families, for example the outstanding provision made
for care leavers.
childrens social care service provide outstanding leadership. Leaders and
managers are ambitious and they are relentlessly focused on improving
outcomes and strive for excellence, so that children get the best possible
service.
partnership work and in particular the joint working arrangements between the
local authority and the health service provider. This is underpinned by a fully
integrated childrens social care and health service; a delivery model which
provides a highly effective response for children and families.


Summary for children and young people
 Social workers are committed and work hard to meet the needs of children and
families. Children told inspectors that they are highly satisfied with the level of
help they receive and that their workers want them to do their very best.


Councillors and the managers give the highest priority to providing support for
vulnerable children and their families and this has ensured that children and
families consistently get a good service.

 Childrens needs are assessed by workers who listen to them and know them well
and there are many opportunities for children and young people to have their say
about the service they receive, which is leading to continual improvement.
However, not many children are using the independent advocate service to help
them get their views across at important meetings.
 There is a wide range of early help services which are helping children and young
people, including the excellent support provided by youth workers. Youth workers
work really well with young people who go missing or are at risk of sexual
exploitation and this helps to safely reduce risk for these children and young
people.
 When there are safeguarding concerns about children or young people these are
managed quickly and effectively to ensure that children are protected, or they are
given advice and guidance on where to get the help they need.
 Children who are in the care of the local authority live in good homes close to
Trafford so they can stay in the same school and have good contact with friends
and family.
 Children and young people experience good arrangements to support their health
and well-being and they attend good schools. They achieve better results than
children in the care of other local authorities and the attainment gap is closing
between them and other children living in Trafford.
 Everybody wants the best for all children and young people in their care and their
successes are celebrated.
 Young people who are in Traffords care do very well. They live in homes where
they feel safe, with the support they need. A high proportion of young people are
in employment, education or training and they receive the help they need so that
they are equipped for independence as they progress to adulthood.


Information about this local authority area3
Children living in this area
 Approximately 52,728 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Trafford. This is 23% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 15% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 12% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 10% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 22% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British and Mixed.
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 16% (the national average is 19%)
 in secondary schools is 9% (the national average is 14%).
 Trafford is a comparatively affluent Borough, but with distinct areas of relative
deprivation.
Child protection in this area
 At 31st December 2014, 1,346 children had been identified through assessment
as being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is a small
reduction from 1,398 at 31 March 2014.
 At 31st December 2014, 258 children and young people were the subject of a
child protection plan. This is a reduction from 283 at 31 March 2014.
 At 28th January 2015, less than five children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a reduction from six at 31 March 2014.
Children looked after in this area
 At 31st December 2014, 338 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 63.8 per 10,000 children). This is an increase from 315 (60
per 10,000 children) at 31 March 2014. Of this number:


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


authority area
authority area
area
 no children are unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 16 adoptions (January-December 2014)
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people ceased to be looked after and are now
living in houses of multiple occupation.
Other Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates three childrens homes. One is judged to require
improvement and two are judged to be good or outstanding at their most recent
Ofsted inspection.
Other information about this area
 The Director of Childrens Services has been in post since July 2010.
 The chair of the LSCB has been in post since January 2010.


These are residential special schools that look after children for 295 days or less per year.


Inspection judgements about the local authority
Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
who need help and protection

Good

Summary
Children, young people and families benefit from a wide range of good quality, wellcoordinated services at all levels of need. Services are readily accessible and have a
demonstrable impact, leading to improved outcomes for children and families.
There is widespread understanding among professionals of the thresholds for access
to social care intervention. The multi-agency referral and assessment team (MARAT)
brings together professionals from different agencies in one place and ensures that
information is shared promptly and the right response is provided. Decisions taken
about how and when to intervene in childrens lives are timely and appropriate.
Swift, decisive action is taken to ensure that children at risk of significant harm are
effectively safeguarded.
Completion of assessments is timely and they make good use of relevant historical
factors in a childs life in evaluating risk and need and identifying how to provide
help. They are appropriately focused on process but there is little use of research
recorded by social workers to support their decisions and there is insufficient
consideration of the impact of equality and diversity. Plans do not consistently focus
on what progress needs to be made by when.
The voice of the child is heard and evident in assessments, and is helping to shape
effective plans and direct work with children and families. However, children do not
have routine access to an independent advocate to support them through the child
protection process.
Management oversight of work with children and families is good. There are effective
systems in place to ensure that actions and decisions are reviewed and, where
necessary, challenged. Plans drawn up for children are outcome-focused and
regularly reviewed. The use of a dedicated reviewing officer to oversee work with
CiN is highly effective.
Social workers know the children they work with well and provide good support to
meet their needs and help them stay safe. Children and young people at risk of harm
through going missing or CSE have access to very good support from youth workers.
The Children with Additional Needs team (CANs) provides children, young people and
their families with good support at the right level.


that provides help at an early stage. These services are underpinned by a
coherent multi-agency strategy and this is making a significant difference in
improving the lives of children and families.
childrens centres. There has been a significant increase in health visitor
capacity, supporting the delivery of intensive support to 98% of Traffords
children in their first year of life through the Trafford pathway. There is a
structured approach to the provision by specialist health services of targeted
support for hard-to-reach families. This is effective for those families where
there are problems associated with domestic abuse, parental substance misuse
and mental health problems.
schools, with three social workers working with school staff, health visitors and
school nurses to support families with emerging problems. To date, 216 families
have received SCIP support. The Stronger Families programme has worked with
This work is led by the multi-agency Stronger Families Team located with the
local authoritys MARAT. They undertake assessments, using the common
assessment framework (CAF), which provide a sound basis for effective work
with families.
there is a thorough analysis of the issues and concerns. Issues are prioritised
well. The voice of the child is threaded throughout the CAF and there is a
thorough account of the needs of individuals as well as progress made. The
CAF assessment is being used widely by professionals, but some early help
professionals are opting to use other forms of assessment because they say the
CAF takes too long to complete. Although this is not affecting the good quality
of service provided, it does mean that families do not experience a consistent
approach from agencies that they have contact with, leading to some
duplication.
systems and processes. When cases are referred to childrens social care
through the MARAT, consent is routinely sought from parents to share
information where necessary and this is recorded in childrens case notes. The
MARAT is multi-agency, and well established, so information is quickly shared
and evaluated by professionals. Although the electronic record systems of the
different agencies are not integrated, defined processes ensure that there is
prompt information sharing; for example, between police and childrens social
care in relation to CSE. CAFs are logged in the eCAF module of the electronic
social care record (ESCR), and this supports efficient information-sharing and
reduces the need for children and parents to repeat their story more than once.


professionals in all agencies and applied appropriately by staff in the MARAT.
The very large majority of referrals are appropriate. Professionals from across
the partnership have ready access to social work consultation through the
MARAT, and inspectors saw this leading to appropriate interventions to help
children. Good use is made of the agreed single agency referral form. Cases are
stepped down from social care to universal services appropriately when needs
have been met, and stepped up when a need for social care intervention is
identified.
social work advice. All decisions about next steps are taken by suitably-qualified
social work personnel. Decisions are clearly recorded, and in most cases the
rationale is clearly stated. Case records consistently show evidence of good
management oversight. Almost all decisions seen in MARAT are appropriate,
though in two cases seen by inspectors involving domestic abuse, decisions to
take no further action were premature, and these children were subject to a
repeat referral before action was taken. All contacts, including those with new
information on existing cases, are promptly dealt with. There are no
unallocated contacts or referrals. MARAT staff routinely let professionals know
the outcome of their referrals to childrens social care.
services. All actions taken by EDT are recorded on the ESCR and sent to the
MARAT promptly. This minimises delay in follow-up.
strategy meetings are attended by an exceptionally wide range of professionals;
they are well recorded and result in a clear set of actions. Child protection
investigations under Section 47 of the Children Act 1989 (S47s) are timely and
thorough. Managers provide good oversight, involve a range of agencies
appropriately, and effectively identify whether a child is at significant risk of
harm. Decisions to progress from a child protection enquiry to an initial child
protection conference (ICPC) are appropriate and timely and thresholds are
consistently applied. Police protection powers are used sparingly, but used
appropriately when there is a need to provide immediate protection.


needs. Assessments are comprehensive and include good consideration of the
childs current circumstances, history and, in all cases seen, a clear analysis of
need which is sharply focused on risks and protective factors. Assessments
routinely include good consideration of the childs wishes and feelings. Risk
factors such as those indicating neglect and sexual exploitation are recognised
and inform planning and intervention. Social workers are using chronologies
held on the case records and this is helping to improve the quality of their
assessments. The quality of these is at least adequate, and in some cases
better. Very few assessments are explicitly informed by research, and they
show a lack of attention to issues of equality, diversity and identity. However,
those completed by the CANs team have a good focus on issues of disability.
Assessments inform the development of child in need and child protection plans
well, and this leads to help that focuses on identified need. Assessments are
updated for reviews, child protection conferences and child in need meetings or
when their circumstances change. Where risk remains, good use is made of the
Public Law Outline (PLO) to consider and plan next steps. Where necessary,
children come into the care of the local authority appropriately.
assessments completed, and are outcome focused. They include some specific
objectives but can be vague in relation to the stated outcomes and timescales.
They do not explicitly identify what progress needs to be made. However, the
exemplary use of a specialist independent IRO to oversee and chair case
reviews for the 80 children with the highest level of need ensures that progress
is evaluated thoroughly and recorded. The parents that were seen as part of
this inspection reported that they really valued this approach. Cases show clear
progress, stability and good outcomes for children, with parents well engaged
in promoting childrens welfare. This has contributed to a 12% reduction in the
number of children on a child protection plan between 31 March 2014 and the
time of the inspection.


protection. The very large majority (90%) of ICPCs are held within 15 working
days of the strategy meeting, as required by statutory guidance. This is very
good performance when measured against similar councils (73%) and the
England average (69% in 201314). ICPCs are well attended by multi-agency
professionals. Social work reports to ICPCs provide a good assessment of risks
and protective factors, and minutes show that they are evaluated thoroughly,
leading to appropriate decisions to safely reduce risk posed to children. At the
end of March 2014, 57% of all children on a child protection plan were
categorised as experiencing or being at risk of emotional harm and 40% had a
plan for neglect. The local authority and its partners recognised that the
category for emotional harm was being over-used and neglect under-used, and
have taken action to ensure a better understanding of the categories. At the
end of January 2015, the respective figures for emotional abuse and neglect
were 47% and 48%. Inspectors saw no recent cases where an inappropriate
category was used. This means that risks are understood better and service
responses are closely matched to meet the individual needs of children and
their families.
to be done clearly enough. As a consequence it is not clear what success will
look like. Instead, they are task-oriented. Progress is evaluated at review child
protection conferences (RCPCs), which also provide effective challenge. For
example, in one case seen a recommendation that a plan should end was
rightly challenged assertively by the IRO chairing the meeting and the
recommendation made by the social worker was not accepted. When RCPCs
decide to end a child protection plan, good practice ensures an outline child in
need plan is established for the next phase of the work with the family. In
cases examined by inspectors, the decisions made at RCPC about whether a
plan should continue were appropriate in the light of progress made and the
improvement in outcomes.
protection plan for a second or subsequent time (23%, compared with a
statistical neighbour average of 15% and England average of 16% in 201314),
the local authority has established a system of plenary meetings. These follow
ICPCs where a decision is made to place a child on a child protection plan
within twelve months of the end of the previous plan. Plenary meetings involve
professional participants in the ICPC, including the chair and the chair of the
RCPC involved in the decision to end the previous plan. Findings from this
process are reported upwards to senior leaders and the LSCB, and inform
training, policy and guidance. For example, IROs have been provided with
additional training in guiding conferences on disguised compliance in domestic
abuse cases in response to a plenary meeting finding that this had been
missed. This approach is good practice, helping to drive change and learning,
but it has not yet had a demonstrable impact on reducing numbers, though it
has already helped to improve social work practice leading to improved
outcomes for children.


resistant to working with them or where chaotic lifestyles make it hard to form
relationships with them. Examples were seen of social workers taking assertive
action to protect children in these situations.
required by guidance. Core group meetings involve parents and relevant
professionals, including, where appropriate, professionals from adult mental
health and drug/alcohol services. Most records made of core group meetings
fail to provide a clear picture of progress against objectives; in some cases, this
is a result of the weaknesses in the detail of some child protection plans. Of the
eight records examined, only two are judged good. Nevertheless, close scrutiny
of the individual case work undertaken with families confirmed that social work
practice has ensured that child protection plans are progressed effectively;
parents understand what they need to do to reduce risks posed to their
children, the progress they have made and what remains to be done.
support at the right level. The innovative use of personalised budgets enables
flexible provision to meet needs in line with the childs or familys wishes. Colocation of childrens social care staff with other professionals, such as
physiotherapists and speech and language therapists, ensures that there is
effective communication and joint planning. Few children with additional needs
have been identified as being in need of protection, but when this does happen,
decision-making and actions are prompt and appropriate.
There is evidence that childrens views influence significant decisions about
their future. Social workers know children well and understand their needs. The
large majority of case files provide a clear picture of the childs life and their
wishes and feelings. Records show that social workers visit children regularly
and spend time working directly with them. The local authority has identified
that social workers do not always see them alone and the reason for this is not
always clearly recorded on the ESCR. Senior managers have a strong grip on
this area of work, supported by clear reporting arrangements, and they actively
challenge frontline social workers practice to be assured that children are seen
and seen alone in accordance with the frequency specified in their child
protection plan.


protection conferences through direct contact and the child-friendly and
provision has also been made for children who want to make their views known
though the use of an electronic system. In a very small number of cases,
children have attended conferences to present their views themselves. Where
children are pre-verbal, records include observation and analysis of their life
experience. Children with additional needs who have a child protection plan and
who need help to express their views in the child protection process are
supported by their schools or social workers, and through a range of measures
including use of a picture exchange communication system (PECS). Although
there are two examples of children being supported by an independent
advocate, this practice is under developed so opportunities for children to
express their views are not maximised.
and police have a good, shared understanding of the risks to children from
domestic abuse. Police apply thresholds well and make appropriate referrals of
children at risk of harm through domestic abuse to childrens social care.
Monthly Multi Agency Risk Assessment Conferences (MARAC) are effective in
agreeing protective measures, and participants report that they are challenged
and held to account. The integrated multi-agency referral and assessment team
ensures that schools are alerted by education welfare officers about pupils
affected by domestic abuse. Case sampling shows good information-sharing,
shared analysis and robust action to secure the safety and well-being of
children. Independent Domestic Violence Advisers (IDVAs) are deployed swiftly
to support victims, often making first contact on the day the incident is
reported or the next working day.
who experience domestic abuse ensure that issues of concern focus on
solutions to safely reduce risk posed to children. They routinely check whether
service users are parents, have caring responsibilities or contact with children.
Their staff are trained in safeguarding children procedures and practice at the
appropriate level. There is evidence in childrens case files that professionals
share information, seek guidance and make referrals appropriately to childrens
social care. They contribute to child protection conferences and core groups. At
the time of the inspection, 74 mental health service users had parental or other
caring responsibilities for children known to childrens social care. Of these, 20
are on a child protection plan and the remainder are CiN. The drug and alcohol
service, Phoenix Futures, is working with the parents or carers of 90 children
known to childrens social care and others who are looked after by the
authority.


Police carry out safe and well checks and young people are offered a follow-up
interview within 72 hours of their return with a youth worker from the Talkshop
service. This is the main support service provided by the local authority to
engage this group of vulnerable children. From April to December 2014, 243
children and young people were reported as missing. Of these, 68 had return
interviews and 93 spoke to a youth worker by telephone. Others received
information and advice in leaflet format. Just under 100 of these young people
engaged with the youth service and 30 entered into work focused specifically
on sexual exploitation. Records are shared with childrens social care, and
Talkshop staff have access to the childrens social care ESCR system. Records
of return interviews show that key questions are asked, including where the
child was while missing, and risk factors are identified, so that professionals can
identify trends or hotspots to inform decisions and actions. The local authority
acknowledges that records do not contain sufficient detailed analysis of the
likelihood of further episodes or actions to mitigate risks and there are firm
plans in place to address this weakness.
missing episodes or exposure to possible or actual sexual exploitation. These
paint a vivid and moving picture of outstanding support delivered with great
sensitivity and persistence by youth workers. The young people all said that
their lives would have been much worse without this support, and that it has
helped them to protect themselves from serious harm.
working through MARAT to triangulate information and where necessary MARAT
will work with the Behaviour and Attendance Service (Education) to achieve a
resolution. Effective multi-agency links enable a thorough consideration of risk
factors such as CSE and a good coordinated response. The number of children
missing from education reduced from six in September 2014 to one in February
having been at risk of sexual exploitation. When required, effective support is in
place for those children who are home educated. In the past year, 18 children
and young people have been electively home educated (EHE). Fourteen of
these have since returned to school.
coordinated and readily available. Trafford operates a multi-agency Sexual
Exploitation and Missing (SEAM) panel. This panel considers and monitors all
CSE referrals to ensure that appropriate plans and responses are in place for
each young person identified to be at risk. IROs are made aware of
recommendations made by the panel so that they can follow them up
appropriately at child protection conferences and child in need and looked after
children reviews. Between April 2014 and the end of January 2015, 54 children
and young people were referred to the SEAM panel.


presented by adults in a position of trust in relation to children. The local
authority designated officer (LADO) initiates action appropriately in respect of
such allegations. All LADO cases seen by inspectors demonstrate a good
response, with prompt and appropriate steps taken to protect children and
active follow-up to ensure that outcomes for children are good. Head teachers
spoke very positively about the role of the LADO, as they can access advice and
guidance to support their work.
despite extensive efforts by the local authority to raise awareness, such as the
good links with schools to promote awareness of this issue. Assessments and
support for those children who have been identified are good. All actions arising
from the earlier private fostering inspection have been completed.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

The experiences and progress of children
looked after and achieving permanence

Good

Summary
Leaders and senior managers are well informed and plan effectively to meet the
needs of looked after children. The well established and effective arrangements for
joint working, delivered through the integrated service model involving health, social
care and education, result in holistic plans for children. This work is supported by
high standards of social work practice, leading to good outcomes for children.
The passionate commitment and persistence of all staff involved with care leavers is
a strong feature of the service. Care leavers experience good access to advice and
support and excellent quality accommodation; a very high proportion of care leavers
are in employment, education or training.
The local authority has high aspirations for the children in its care, who have good
access to high quality education and leisure opportunities. A large proportion of
looked after children attend good or better schools where they make good progress.
Elected members and strategic leaders give high priority to looked after children and
the Corporate Parenting Board provides strong leadership and champions the needs
of looked after children. The Children in Care Council (CiCC) is well supported and
has had a measurable impact on service improvements.
Social work practice actively supports good engagement with looked after children.
Childrens views are used well to inform their assessments and plans to a high
standard. The quality of social work assessments is generally good. Social workers
and managers are able to articulate appropriate objectives and timescales for
children, but these are not always clearly recorded in childrens care plans.
A high proportion of looked after children live in good or better homes where they
thrive. Health outcomes are good and effective support for children with complex
needs has prevented unnecessary moves for children. Insufficient priority is given to
ensuring that children who could benefit from an independent visitor have access to
the service.
There is a prompt response to permanence plans for children, with improving
performance on adoption leading to good matching of children with families, but the
use of SGOs (special guardian orders) remains low. Family finding practice is
sophisticated, persistent and successful. The quality of adopter assessments is
consistently good and some are excellent, although delay was identified in a small
number of the cases sampled.


local authority care is robust. Senior managers are always consulted about the
decision to look after a child or young person. These decisions are informed by
a thorough assessment of the childs circumstances and possible alternatives to
care. Thresholds are well understood by social workers and are applied
consistently. There are no examples of children entering the care system
unnecessarily.
has been steadily rising as a result of the authoritys policy of supporting older
young people (16-plus) within the looked after system more effectively and for
longer. Overall, the authority is able to demonstrate that it understands and is
able to plan for present and future service demand and to achieve good
outcomes for children, despite the recent increase in numbers.
Over time, the local authority has developed an impressive range of effective
services, including a Multi-Systemic Therapy programme (MST), an outreach
service, and specialist foster carers (Me2). Many of these services have been
developed to help provide effective support for children on the edge of care.
They are also used flexibly to provide good support for both short-term and
permanent placements, and to support effective support for children and young
people to return home when this is in their best interests. Responsibility for
decision making is clearly defined. The use of specialist placements for children
is overseen by a multi-disciplinary placements panel. Managers on the panel
have the delegated authority to make flexible, child-centred decisions to ensure
that childrens changing needs are met and placements do not breakdown
unnecessarily.
ensure that decisions to start legal proceedings are carefully considered. Social
workers produce high quality, holistic assessments and reports, and the PLO is
used well to avoid unnecessary delay for children. The local authoritys
performance for the timely completion of care proceedings has improved
significantly and is currently in line with the national target of 26 weeks. The
authority has a good working relationship with the Children and Family Court
Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass) and the courts.
underpinned by the highly effective integrated health and childrens social care
service delivery model. These arrangements are embedded and provide good
access to high quality services. For example, the co-location of social workers
with health staff and child and adolescent mental health service (CAMHS)
workers supports good access to services for children with complex needs.
These arrangements and the authoritys long-standing commitment to
innovative and evidence-based practice have resulted in continual
improvements and better outcomes for children.


national indicators shows 100% of initial health assessments are completed
within 28 days when children first become looked after and 98% of children in
care for 12 months have a health assessment completed. Although
performance on the percentage of looked after children who have an annual
dental check has reduced from 98% to 88%, performance is still above national
and statistical neighbour averages. Health service provision is sharply focused
on meeting looked after childrens needs. This is characterised by the good
level of attention given to promoting healthy lifestyles for children through
information and advice. This is helping to raise awareness with children under
With older children this awareness raising includes aspects of their sexual
health. The completion of the strengths and difficulties questionnaire, as part of
the health assessment process, is helping to harness the views of children to
influence the shape of the service they receive. The service has agreed clear
referral pathways to Phoenix Futures, a drug and alcohol services for young
people, so they get the service they need early.
social workers receive consultation and advice within one or two days of
referral and the service provides KEEP training, for foster carers so that they
are better equipped to support children to prevent placements breaking down
unnecessarily. CAMHS provides support to the Me2 and MST programmes to
ensure that the children with the most complex level of need are supported
effectively. Where children need a more intensive individual service they may
wait up to 16 weeks, but the service will respond more quickly if the need is
urgent. CAMHS also provides advice and consultation for children who are
placed outside the area who are receiving a service from another CAMHS.
specialist services. Social workers are managed and co-located with health
colleagues including physiotherapists, psychologists and speech and language
therapists. This ensures that childrens health and disability needs are
comprehensively assessed and fully integrated into their plans. Good provision
is made for children and families, who benefit from a short break through the
dedicated Short Term Break service, and the authority also provides additional
respite arrangements for children who are placed with independent providers to
ensure childrens individual needs are closely met.
victims of homophobic bullying are offered help and well supported. Although
some good practice was seen, assessments and plans do not always ensure
that childrens racial origin is sufficiently considered and their needs sufficiently
reflected in their plans. Managers identified equality and diversity as an area for
improvement following a peer review in 2013, and this area of social work
practice is subject to an action plan which is being closely monitored, but
progress has been slow.


in their care. Children are listened to; social workers know them well and see
them alone. The local authority is committed to ensuring that the voice of the
child is heard and taken into account in planning and in the delivery of services;
action taken by the authority to improve this area of practice has been
effective, and includes clear recording of direct contact with children in
chronologies and reports for childrens reviews. In 11 of the tracked and
sampled cases, where the voice of the child was explored by inspectors, it was
found to have been captured and considered very well by their social worker in
nearly all cases. Children participate in 90% of looked after children reviews;
although only 34% attend their review meetings, the majority of children use
the Viewpoint service to make their views known. IROs actively promote the
role of independent visitors, but only four young people have benefited from
this personalised support.
entitlements, including how to access information available on the local
authority website. An online system to encourage children and young people to
record their views has been purchased by the authority, and is being promoted
by social workers and IROs. Young people are increasingly using this system so
their views are known and acted on by the local authority. The local authority
also distributes an annual questionnaire to children and young people, and the
results are analysed and published. This has resulted in a we said, they did
leaflet which sets out the actions taken by the service to address the issues
raised by children and young people. Examples from the long list of actions
include: support for driving lessons; improvements in the IRO service; a
commitment to use the Pupil Premium to deliver resources to individual
children; and gym membership.
which has regular positive contact with senior managers, who they know well.
The CiCC participates in the Corporate Parenting Board and is encouraged to
contribute to service development and improvement in areas such as the local
authoritys pledge to children and young people in care and the annual
questionnaire. CiCC members have also been part of the selection process for
senior staff in the local authority, including interviews leading to the
appointment of the current Chief Executive.
able to give a good account of the childs circumstances and assessed needs.
Although social workers are visiting children regularly to meet their individual
needs and respond to their changing circumstances, a small number of children
who are well settled where they live do not receive a visit by their social worker
within the frequency required by regulations. The local authority is monitoring
this area of work closely.


social workers did not consider all relevant information in their assessments, so
plans were not sufficiently robust. There are effective joint systems in place, led
by the police, to assess and manage the risks to children and young people
who go missing from care. When they return, young people are almost always
seen by the police and their social worker and they are also encouraged to take
up the offer of a return interview. In eight out of nine cases where this aspect
was explored by an inspector, these arrangements worked well and the young
person concerned cooperated with plans to address their needs and keep them
safe. The links between going missing and risk of sexual exploitation are well
understood by social workers and managers and inform their response to young
peoples risk-taking behaviour.
children, including well managed access to in-house and external foster carers
and childrens homes. He placement manager has management responsibility
for the authoritys fostering and childrens home provision. Robust
arrangements are in place to monitor the use of external residential provision
on an individual case basis, supported by routine visits made by the placement
manager with childrens social workers to ensure that they are able to meet the
changing needs of the children concerned.
Two of the three local authoritys own childrens homes are judged good or
better. Although the third home was judged adequate at the last inspection, the
authority has been working to improve it, including employing a permanent
Registered Manager.
well supported and receive a good service. They are visited regularly and their
health, education and contact with family are well planned and monitored.
Where concerns emerge or standards drop after a child is placed, there are
clear arrangements for assessing and monitoring the providers ability to
continue to meet the needs of the child or young person in placement.
challenging but realistic targets for the recruitment of new foster carers to meet
the specific needs of the current and projected population of looked after
children. These form part of the authoritys well-researched sufficiency strategy.
The fostering panel is well managed, effective and meets three times per
month, so decisions about childrens placements are timely and children do not
experience delay. Children are carefully matched with appropriate carers or
placements according to their assessed needs. Carers receive regular, high
quality supervision from their supervising social workers, which is monitored by
the fostering service team manager.


Managers actively promote this work with social workers in their supervision
and IROs provide effective challenge at childrens reviews. Foster carers and
social workers are provided with training in this area, and carers are provided
with memory boxes to store materials which will later help children to
understand their histories.
number of carers who have successfully evidenced that they have achieved the
relevant Training, Support and Development Standard. This in now in line with
the national average of 57%, having been promoted through the payment for
skills scheme, which was introduced so that carers payments are clearly linked
to their level of training. Managers are confident that this will act as a further
incentive for more carers to take up offers of training. Complaints and
allegations against foster carers are well managed and recorded. Foster carers
are aware of the need for transparency in this area and all carers have access
to independent support facilitated by the local authority.
supervision, support and training, including the online courses, they receive.
Foster carers report that there has been an improvement in the amount and
quality of information they receive from social workers before children are
placed, which is helping them to meet the needs of children. Carers feel they
are treated with respect as colleagues and that their contribution to childrens
plans is valued. Foster carers receive mandatory training in safe care, health
and safety, and equality and diversity, and all carers seen had also accessed
the authoritys KEEP training programme which they value. There are active
carers forums which provide peer support and representation. The authority
has developed an impressive, innovative, specialist fostering scheme, Me2,
which has had a positive impact for young people with challenging behaviour,
to avoid the breakdown of their placement wherever possible. In the previous
two years the Me2 service provided effective support for children to return to
live with their own families leading to a successful and sustained return home
for 15 out of 19 children and young people involved.
they are placed. The authoritys performance in respect of placement stability is
very good at the time of the inspection, with 80% of children who have been
looked after for two and a half years or more in the same placement for the last
two years. Very few children (3%) have experienced three or more placement
changes in the last 12 months. Good arrangements are in place to support
young people to remain with their foster carers after they reach the age of 18 if
this is in their best interests and the foster carer is in agreement. This staying
put arrangement is also available to young people who are placed with carers
from independent fostering agencies. This was helping to provide effective
support to meet the needs of all three young people sampled by inspectors.


is supported by the good use of planning meetings, including legal planning
meetings, and an effective placement panel. However, for a small number of
children a permanence plan has not been determined by the time of their
second review, so outcomes for these children are less clear. IROs are closely
monitoring this area of work to ensure that children do not experience
unnecessary delay. SGOs are under used, with only four children experiencing
this route to permanence last year. However, they are increasingly being
considered as a permanence option for children, with plans for seven children
currently being explored.
high standards and better outcomes for children and young people, and
childrens progress is tracked effectively between their reviews. Effective
planning ensures that brothers and sisters are placed together unless their
assessed needs indicate otherwise. Contact arrangements are routinely and
carefully assessed and considered in childrens reviews. IROs instigate the
dispute resolution process effectively to ensure that plans for children are
progressed, and performance on the timely completion of looked after
childrens statutory reviews is very good at 99%.
Teacher has a clear strategic vision and drive for improvement. The completion
of personal education plans (PEPs) has improved term by term. All looked after
children now have a PEP and this success is attributed to the work done by the
newly appointed PEP Coordinator. Almost all (99%) PEPs have been completed
within timescales. Priorities are identified, rag rated and resources identified.
As a result, children and young people are supported to reach their full
potential. The need for any specialist support is addressed in a timely manner.
both academic and pastoral needs of looked after children. Rigorous monitoring
and tracking systems are in place. The monthly resource panel reviews
progress and engagement against the PEP targets. Appropriate challenge is
provided by the Corporate Parenting Board Education Group.
with 39% in outstanding schools; 100% of post-16 pupils are in good or better
provision. Careful consideration is given to the individual needs of the eight
pupils who attend schools judged to require improvement and the 25 pupils in
inadequate schools, and their progress is closely monitored.


rising from 94% to 96%. On average, attendance is now only one per cent
below the national average for all children. Welfare Call is a commissioned
service which monitors the daily attendance of looked after children, and swift
action is taken when attendance reduces. There have been no permanent
exclusions in this academic year, and of the 14 pupils excluded for a fixed term
this academic year, all pupils are now back in school.
good level of development at the end of the Early Years Foundation Stage, from
and the national average of 60% compared to the general population. Good
links are in place with the Early Years Consultant, who has allocated time for
the virtual school children, which is driving improvement. Good lines of
communication are also in place between the consultant, the three childrens
centre groups and provision in the private, voluntary and maintained sector.
attainment of looked after children nationally at Key Stage 2 and Key Stage 4.
Progress from Key Stage 1 to Key Stage 2 is good. Out of 15 pupils 80% made
the expected level of progress in mathematics and 93% made expected levels of
progress in reading at Key Stage 2. This is better than the national results for the
general cohort where 91% of children achieved expected progress in reading
and 89% in mathematics. At Key Stage 2 the percentage of looked after
children in Trafford who achieved level four in reading was 91% compared with
after children in Trafford obtaining level four or above compared with 61% of
all children nationally. The percentage of looked after children achieving level
four at Key Stage 2 has improved since 2012 by 18%, in reading and 11%, in
mathematics. This achievement reflects a rapid narrowing of the gap in
attainment between looked after children and their peers in Trafford, by 17%
for reading and 23% for mathematics since 2012.
very good. The proportion of looked after children achieving five GCSEs A*-C
including English and mathematics has risen from 21% in 2012 to 32% in 2014.
This is significantly above the national average of 15% for looked after children
and also that of statistical neighbours at 12.9%. The gap between looked after
children and other children living in Trafford has reduced from 51% to 39%. It
is a testament to the success of looked after children that there are examples
of young people accessing grammar school places.
authority issues children with a junior active leisure card, which provides
subsidised access to all leisure centres in the borough. Children are also
supported to pursue special interests such as sports and music tuition, which is
adding to the richness of childrens lives so that they can reach their potential
and feel fulfilled.


The graded judgment for adoption performance is that it is good
determination to secure permanence for children through the use of adoption.
Adoption is actively considered in the care planning and review process for
children when it is not safe or appropriate for them to return to live with their
birth parents and where permanence within their extended family is not
appropriate or achievable. Effective systems and alerts are in place to ensure
that the adoption team is aware of those children at the earliest opportunity.
The adoption manager attends legal planning meetings to obtain information
and offer advice. He can access the legal proceedings tracker and meets
regularly with the lead legal officer to ensure accuracy of information and that
any potential delays are identified and minimised.
issued or at the point of commencing the PLO process. The adoption social
worker and team manager meet with the birth parents to explain the twin
tracking process. Work begins on the childs placement report quickly so that it
is ready for the adoption panel and to share with other agencies and adopters.
Childrens profiles are drafted and professional photographs and DVDs of
children are produced. Good use is made of the up-to-date intelligence of
adopters available within the Four4Adoption collaboration. This can identify
very early links that are not actively pursued until the placement order is
granted. This contributes positively to reducing the time that children wait.
Children benefit from being matched and placed quickly because staff have
already established if they need to extend the search regionally, using wellestablished links in Adoption 22, a consortium of 22 local authorities in the
north west of England, target specialist voluntary adoption agencies or to
initiate a national search for a suitable family. Funding is available for childspecific recruitment and assessment by specialist agencies. Overall, family
finding practice in Trafford is sophisticated, persistent and successful. As a
result, adopters have been identified for five out of six children waiting for a
permanent adoptive family.


which has led to improved outcomes for these children. Timeliness for these
children when measured against the indicators on the national scorecard shows
good progress, with seven of them being placed within the required timescale.
The authoritys performance for placing children as measured by the adoption
scorecard over the last three years requires further improvement, which the
authority has acknowledged. The scorecard three year average shows the
authority to take 190 days more than the national average to place a child for
adoption from entering care and to take 200 days longer to place a child after
an order has been obtained. Figures show the overall performance being
influenced by a dip in 2012-13 with significantly better performance from 2013
onwards. The adoption team and senior managers have a good understanding
of why performance dipped in 2012-13. Close scrutiny of the individual cases
concerned determined that seven children in the cohort had highly complex
needs and were difficult to place. The authority demonstrated a determination
to find families for these children as this was the right plan despite the
challenges. The impact of this will continue to be reflected in the scorecard until
viable option for permanence for children, and good processes are in place to
support this through robust tracking and monitoring arrangements. There is
strong evidence of a trend of improvement in both of the key indicators starting
in 2013. The local authority has projected further improvement over time.
delivered through the award winning Four4adoption partnership with
neighbouring authorities, which ensures that there is a growing pool of
adopters and choice for children. Adopters receive a streamlined and wellcoordinated service and consistent information with a comprehensive pack,
including information about adoption support. The effective use of a screening
tool establishes eligibility to adopt and makes an initial assessment of what the
applicant could offer for Traffords children. Applicants are sensitively
signposted to other agencies and information sources as appropriate. Enquiries
are promptly followed up with home visits and applicants can get on to the
Stage One preparation groups quickly and anywhere across the Four4adoption
collaboration. All adopters spoken to commented very positively about their
experience, its timeliness and the impact of the high quality of training.
increasingly analytical and in some cases, excellent. Experienced staff skilfully
and appropriately challenge and stretch adopters to consider their capacity to
parent and, support contact with siblings, accept children with complex
backgrounds and foster to adopt. Adopters spoken to are unanimously positive
about their experience of assessment and one said it was thorough, in depth
but not rushed.


with 32 approved in the last 12 months, so there are more adopters than there
are children waiting to be matched. Staff work hard to ensure that they are
considered by other agencies, so that other children can be adopted and the
waiting time is reduced for those adopters. Inter-agency fees received are used
well to improve the service. Despite the strong performance on recruitment,
there is further room for improvement in the timeliness at stage one and two of
the recruitment process. Out of 19 adopters who ended stage one in the 12
months prior to the inspection, 14 were in timescales. Out of the five which
were not in timescales two were due to service related issues. Out of 25
adopters who completed stage two in the 12 months prior to the inspection 19
were completed in timescale. Out of six which were not completed in timescale
four were due to issues out of the local authoritys control and two were due to
deferrals at panel. Staff are alert to the reasons for this and there is learning
that can be used to address delays, for example, from the adoption panel
feedback so that cases dont have to be deferred unnecessarily for social
workers to do further work or to gather more information. The very
experienced independent adoption panel chair considers that the quality of
assessments and matching is consistently good. There is robust scrutiny and
challenge by the chair and panel members, contributing to learning and leading
to continual improvement in practice. The panel meets twice a month, to
respond to childrens needs and reduce delays. There is a good professional
working relationship between the chair and the agency decision maker. There
have not been any significant differences of view or rejection of panel
recommendations.
children to develop secure relationships and avoids disruptions. Children and
their families receive responsive and high quality social work support and well
informed advice and guidance. Life story work is given high priority and
children have life story books at the time of their placement. Later life letters
are timely. Adopters value the dedicated service from a specialist adoption
psychologist. AdOpt training is available, led by Trafford, which uses learning
from disruptions and focuses on parenting older adopted children and identity
issues.
the offer available at enquiry stage and throughout their individual adoption
journeys. The Letterbox service currently coordinates indirect contact for 108
children, and 22 children and 18 families are receiving social work support from
the team. A further 39 adopted children are being supported by the specialist
adoption psychologist service. For some this is in addition to the social work
input, but others have accessed the provision through universal services. The
adoption support team also provides counselling for birth parents and adult
adoptees.


The graded judgment about the experience and progress of care leavers is
that it is outstanding
Corporate parents have ensured that there is a wide range and choice of
suitable accommodation options for young people along the continuum of
readiness for independence, with 100% of care leavers reporting that they feel
safe and that they live in suitable accommodation.
authority and partner agencies, which has been sustained over time and has
delivered many benefits for care leavers. Progression to a gold standard
service has been due in part to the opportunity seized by senior managers to
participate in the national New Belongings project. Trafford is one of the nine
local authorities involved, and leads a North West cluster of local authorities.
The project is working to implement the principles and concepts of Access All
Areas, to promote access to education and employment and the Charter for
Care Leavers operationally at a local level.
priorities set as a result of the consultation with care leavers, and all of these
have been achieved. There has been excellent, high level support from
Corporate Parents, for example, the speedy implementation of the very
effective pre-payment card so that young people can access their funds quickly.
There are many examples of highly effective and embedded partnership
working, effective and sustained engagement and listening to young people.
This has resulted in good action planning to deliver necessary changes. The
research base and external rigour and challenge provided by the New
Belongings project, and the involvement of two care leavers, have each added
value. The palpable and passionate commitment and persistence by all the staff
involved with care leavers to provide realistic experiential learning opportunities
for young people is one of the most impressive aspects of the service.


care leavers are and has appropriate levels of contact with each individual
based on their personal needs and pathway planning. A strong feature is the
persistence and commitment of staff to support young people and get the best
for them. Staff make dogged efforts to engage with young people and to come
up with ideas and opportunities to motivate them. Workers are highly
responsive to changing needs and offer help by increasing their visiting,
signposting to other agencies and through creatively reviewed support
packages. Young people, who have a chaotic life style, are hard to engage or
whose behaviours lead to eviction from their accommodation, for example, are
very well supported.
through the use of a work book, a tool used to assess their independent living
skills, to identify progress and gaps in their knowledge. They then receive
specific training to meet the needs. The service has a graduated and staged
approach for young people to move from being in care to independence, and
this is reflected and met by the range of accommodation and support packages
available.
children nurses provide good support and advice, information and signposting
for young people post-16 and care leavers. Talk Shop provides a valued
specialist advice and information service for young people. Those young people
who need it receive effective support with drug and alcohol misuse issues from
Phoenix Futures. Access to and intervention by CAMHS is good, with support
going up to age 18. Young people receive a health care booklet at the age of
looked after children health team to enable young people to take charge of
their future health care arrangements.
leavers into adult services. Young people who will need ongoing support have
their needs assessed jointly with adult services soon after their 16th birthday,
so that there are no interruptions or delays in receiving help and the support
services they need.
knowledgeable about, their entitlements, and how to find out if they were
unsure. . The service uses questionnaires and surveys to check whether young
people know about their rights and to identify areas for improvement.
Information is available through the local authority website, the Care Leavers
Charter and the comprehensive guides to leaving care, which include
information on financial support and accommodation options. The guides and
website provide a range of useful links for young people to use.


Trafford) and good emergency arrangements to meet the needs of young
people who are homeless or at risk of being homeless. This is underpinned by
effective support packages, from 24/7 on-site support to bespoke packages of
floating support. There is no use of bed and breakfast or houses of multiple
occupation. The local authority makes effective use of the North West 16-plus
Framework, collaborative commissioning arrangements, to obtain suitable
placements for young people with high levels of need. Staying Put is
established, with 18 young people in placement. A strong supported lodgings
resource for 16 to 21 year-olds has provided up to 24 placements. All care
leavers are given the highest priority banding for housing.
employment and training) from an already good position of 73% of 19 to 21
year-old care leavers in EET in April 2014 to 84% in December 2014. This is an
exceptional achievement by the young people and the staff who work with
them and is above both the national average and the performance of statistical
neighbours. There are 15 young people at university, 49 in further education,
six in apprenticeships, 21 with training providers and seven in employment.
training and providing additional opportunities. These include the 99 Project
with a local premier league football club foundation, a pre-employment training
and apprenticeship programme, and incentivised activity programmes to
encourage young people to seek work or training opportunities with support.
Very effective work is done by committed and persistent Personal advisers (PA)
and social workers to identify opportunities for young people, and to keep them
motivated to access EET as appropriate. Young people on benefits get a very
good service as a result of the authority being one of the first to implement a
working joint protocol with the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). This
means they have a named DWP personal adviser who liaises with the PA about
any issues, in particular failure to attend, which would routinely invoke
sanctions and often lead to financial hardship. The protocol provides for time
for the PA to seek solutions and prevent sanctions from being imposed.
what young people say, and then act on it. Their voice is heard in face-to-face
work on pathway planning and through the care leavers forum, the CiCC, the
annual children in care and care leavers questionnaire and the one year on
analysis of progress on delivering the Care Leavers Charter.
people. Progress is reported to the CiCC, the Corporate Parenting Board and
through the New Belongings project. Action is taken promptly on feedback and
priorities, for example, the implementation of the pre-payment card, the
website and updated care leavers guide. There is an annual care leavers week
and a celebration event which young people appreciate and enjoy.


service they receive, particularly about their PAs. They feel safe where they live
and are pleased with the help they get in finding accommodation. They value
highly the help they receive to achieve their aims and aspirations, for example,
the opportunity to go to London to find out about universities with staff from
the virtual school and the preparation courses which have helped them to
succeed in getting an apprenticeship by building up their skills and confidence.
One young person said I really like it when they phone you up to find out how
an interview has gone, you feel like theyre bothered.


Key judgement

Judgement grade

Leadership, management and
governance

Outstanding

Summary
The leadership and vision provided by elected members and the multi-agency senior
management team is outstanding. This has made a discernible difference, leading an
integrated workforce to deliver consistently good services which comprehensively
meet the needs of children and families living in Trafford. This work is underpinned
by an effective change programme implemented by the DCS and pooled budget
arrangements formalised through a Section 75 Agreement (NHS Act 2006).
Performance management and quality assurance systems are excellent. As a direct
result, good quality services are consistently delivering positive outcomes for children
and young people, from those receiving early help right through to young people
leaving care. A wide range of routine and bespoke auditing activity that is closely
scrutinised leads to good action planning, implementation of change to practice and
thorough review. Leaders and managers have an extremely detailed understanding
of their strengths and weaknesses and this is helping to inform decisions to sustain
good performance and support continual improvement.
Corporate parenting is well established and strong. Elected members and senior
leaders work together to deliver at least good outcomes for looked after children and
outstanding services for care leavers. Political leaders are enthusiastic and passionate
and champion the needs of looked after children across the borough.
Leaders and managers have effectively created an extremely stable and positive
environment for social work to flourish. Recruitment of experienced, well-trained
social workers is successful and retention rates are very good. The MARAT makes
consistent, timely and well informed decisions that ensure that children at risk of
harm are appropriately protected. Effective systems and information sharing practice
identify, track and protect those at risk of being exploited or who go missing.
The local authority and its partners have a very good record of being an organisation
that makes best use of learning drawn from a range of activities. All
recommendations from previous inspections have been implemented. For example,
those making referrals to the service now always receive a written response and
performance is regularly monitored. Although the local authority demonstrates a
strong commitment to resolve complaints received from service users and takes
them seriously, too many complaints take too long to investigate.


integrated multi-agency service. A strong and well-articulated vision underpins
its ambitious and progressive service structure. Strategic and operational
integration is supported by an established Section 75 arrangement that covers
both commissioning and service perspectives. These arrangements provide
effective and appropriate clarity in relation to governance structures. An agreed
and easily understood delegated decision list sets out accountability and
decision making responsibilities. This ensures that safeguarding decisions, use
of budgets and quality assurance standards are appropriate and consistent. The
joint DCS/DASS role is subject to comprehensive risk assessment and
thoroughly considered succession plans are well underway to provide a smooth
transition of responsibilities when the present director leaves imminently. The
benefits of the joint role are clearly seen in the very good focus that adult
services have on the needs of children.
police are co-located and very effectively managed through one structure. The
result is an easily accessible, seamless service without professional barriers that
meets the needs of, and provides good outcomes for, children and families. A
strong and robust MARAT provides a safe front door to services and
demonstrates excellent integrated working. MARAT has access to a wide range
of multi-agency IT systems that underpin robust and good quality information
sharing to inform decisions and plans. Leaders and managers across the
partnership have a very strong grip and this is well demonstrated by the
consistent approach taken by practitioners in implementing agreed and fully
understood thresholds.
and operational levels. This is seen in the clearly defined integrated governance
arrangements and by good levels of engagement in strategic bodies. Key
overarching strategies and plans are of at least good quality, and links in
objectives and priorities are aligned so priorities are delivered consistently
across agencies. Working arrangements between the LSCB Chair, Director of
Childrens Service (DCS) and Chief Executive are in line with statutory guidance
and are subject to appropriate and formal governance protocols so officers are
held to account. Links to the Health and Wellbeing Board (HWBB) are strong
and the JSNA (joint strategic needs assessment) has a strong focus on the
needs of children and young people so local needs are known and priorities
shared and understood. The DCS takes an active role in the HWBB and there is
a formal partnership agreement in place between the LSCB and the HWBB. The
DCS has very strong and direct links with the Clinical Commissioning Group
(CCG) so governance is sharply focused, to eliminate duplication and
operational delivery is effectively targeted to meet the needs of children and
families.


all levels of management. Systems are well established and are extremely
thorough to meet the needs of a fully integrated service. Reporting
arrangements are complex but are understood and demonstrably work well.
Effective mechanisms ensure robust and detailed scrutiny of management
information and include the Chief Executive and the Leader of the Council.
Detailed oversight of frontline practice is undertaken at a monthly DCS-led
safeguarding meeting, where performance down to individual worker level is
considered. In addition, a comprehensive range of quality assurance activities
inform operational planning and day-to-day work.
all levels of the service. These include case file audits on a six-monthly basis
and targeted thematic audits such as chronologies and private fostering.
Additionally, bespoke audits are commissioned in response to external findings
such as Ofsteds Safeguarding Disabled Children thematic inspection report.
Monthly governance visits by the DCS, elected members and senior officers to
frontline teams include meeting individual practitioners, and ensure that social
worker morale and views are taken into account in service development.
Evidence of impact is good, such as in the setting up of a discreet fund to
support service users with no recourse to public funds.
Managers plan their responses in considered ways; for instance, to improve the
quality of childrens plans, managers rolled out a programme of training to
ensure that all staff understood outcome focussed planning. They allowed time
for practice to embed, then audited again; they identified lack of timescales as
an issue, and now have plans to deliver further training to ensure the next
steps improvement will be delivered. Services that are judged good quality
provide evidence of the impact of their strategy.
forefront of much regional and national development work. For example, the
timely implementation of personalisation for children with additional and
complex needs is impressive and has brought excellent value for money to the
local authority. A robust and transparent system, including independent
brokers, awards personal budgets to eligible children and young people.
Additionally, as part of Operation Challenger, a multi-agency operation set-up
to tackle organised crime in Greater Manchester, clearly defined information
sharing arrangements are in place across agencies. This collaborative work
ensures that children who may be at risk can be identified, assessed and
responded to without compromising criminal evidence gathering. In relation to
action taken to prevent radicalisation (HM Government, June 2011), leaders
and managers acknowledge that progress is not as advanced as in some other
local authorities, and action has been stepped up, for example, to roll-out
training and deliver presentations to all head teachers and elected members.


learning from a range of sources, including serious case reviews (SCR). For
example, the impressive development of a dedicated IRO post to review child in
need cases at risk of escalating to child protection is a direct result of learning
from a SCR, and has brought demonstrable benefits through increased
oversight, improved CiN plans and a reduction in the number of children subject
to a child protection plan. Currently, this post is time limited, and managers
must seriously consider the potential risks of not continuing with this service.
The authority had not been notifying serious incidents to Ofsted in all cases
where it is appropriate to do so and managers acknowledged this. The local
protocol was not worded sufficiently clearly to remove doubt as to when
notifications are required; the DCS has already taken corrective action to
address this.
behalf of the authority and CCG, ensures that commissioning of all education,
health and social care services for children and young people is coordinated and
reflects local needs. Future commissioning intentions for 201516 and the year
following are in place and well developed. For instance, all services on the early
help framework will be re-commissioned in line with an agreed new model of
early help. The sufficiency duty is met and a wide range of placements are
available to meet need, and very good, embedded regional collaboration
ensures that purchased provision is monitored routinely and robustly. Children
and young people are regularly consulted, and participate in activities that
inform strategy development, which in turn shapes commissioning intentions. A
good example is the secondary schools conference to inform the Childrens
Trust partnership strategy.
has ensured care leavers have access to a range of apprenticeships within the
local authority. Good cross-political party priority is given to ensuring that
children looked after are safe, and this is underpinned by a dedicated member
for safeguarding who sits on the LSCB. The Chief Executive takes an active role
as a highly committed corporate parent and has recently made an offer to all
Children looked after have access to an effective childrens rights worker who
provides advocacy. However, the use of independent visitors for looked after
children and advocacy in child protection is under developed, so children looked
after and children subject to child protection processes are not able to access
the benefit of such support. Corporate parents are highly ambitious and
aspirational. Evidence of their success is seen in the academic progress of
children looked after. Progress is very good, on an improving trajectory, and
the gap between looked after children and all others is narrowing.


views of children and young people are known and understood through
surveys, casework, the Youth Council and the Corporate Parenting Boards
engagement with the CiCC. Their views are acted on and influence how
services are delivered, such as the resolution of problems that care leavers had
in accessing their entitlements. The local authority has a strong commitment to
complaints from service users and takes them seriously, but too many take too
long to resolve.
the local courts. Cases are filed on time. The authority responds quickly to
safeguarding checks in private law cases and cooperates with arrangements
made in court to promote permanence.
are very well represented by an established and influential Principal Social
Worker. Social workers are extremely tenacious in their efforts to engage with
children and families at every part of the service. The pathway for social
workers to access the assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE) is
well structured and there are good links to two local universities. Expectations
and standards are high and assertive action is taken to manage staff that fall
below expected standards to support improvement. The recording of reflective
supervision is of variable quality, despite a large investment in training and
subsequent audit processes. Social workers can describe good reflective
supervision, but only a minority of records demonstrate it sufficiently well.
Managers are proactively supporting improvement but this work remains a
challenge.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is good
The arrangements in place to evaluate the effectiveness of what is done by the
authority and board partners to safeguard and promote the welfare of children are
good.

Summary of findings
The LSCB is good because:
Partnership working
 It is a mature, developed and effective partnership which challenges and holds
partners to account very well.
 It is an influential strategic partnership that drives and delivers tangible
improvement in key areas, such as embedding the early help framework and
pathways, strengthening child in need work and ensuring that joint work between
agencies is robust and child centred.
 It is a very effective learning organisation that knows itself well. It uses data,
learning reviews and audit effectively to understand frontline practice and drive
improvement. This leads to better outcomes for children.
 Lessons learnt from the last SCR, held in 2012, have been implemented
effectively, and this has improved inter-agency work and frontline practice.

Challenge
 The LSCB has assured itself through multi-agency audit that the work undertaken
by agencies to keep children safe is consistently robust and effective.
 Agencies are held to account effectively for their safeguarding responsibilities
through the Section 11 audit, the Section 175 audit and a regular rolling
programme of robust and thorough critical friend reviews.

Responsiveness
 The LSCB understands the extent of CSE and children who go missing from care,
home and education in its area. It uses intelligence about patterns of CSE to
disrupt perpetrators and coordinates high quality support to victims, which
reduces risk to children. Awareness of CSE in the partnership is good and this is
leading to a rising number of referrals received by childrens social care.


What does the LSCB need to improve?
Areas for improvement

Quality Assurance, Data and Performance
profile local need in the annual report, in order to strengthen the evaluation of
service delivery and inform strategic planning more effectively.
scrutinise work with children in public and private law proceedings.
work around the Prevent strategy and domestic abuse, to ensure that there are
robust, joined-up strategies for children in these areas that address identified
need.
faith groups and the voluntary and community sector.
to evaluate impact.

Inspection judgement about the LSCB
account very effectively. This is evidenced through robust and thorough critical
friends reviews, the challenge log and the delivery of strong, joined-up
partnership arrangements at the strategic and operational levels.
meets statutory requirements. There are appropriate arrangements in place
between the LSCB and the HWBB, Children Trust Board, Safer Trafford
Partnership and the Adult Safeguarding Board which are supported by a
memorandum of understanding. The governance arrangements between the
Chief Executive and LSCB Chair and DCS are clear and appropriate, enabling
the Chief Executive to hold the LSCB Chair to account. The priorities of the
LSCB are appropriate, accord with local need and are delivered effectively
through the LSCB work plan.
HWBB are closely aligned and the LSCB has been effective in shaping and
driving the early help agenda. It published the early help strategy in May 2013,
setting out pathways for early help and clear local thresholds for access to
service. These are well understood by partners and the LSCB holds partners to
account well through close monitoring for their application of thresholds.


closely monitors safeguarding performance using data from a range of key
areas including, missing from home or care, CSE, domestic violence, early help
and mental ill-health and substance misuse. The LSCB investigates trends
through the use of targeted case reviews and audits to better understand the
underlying reasons for them. This enables the LSCB to have a very good
understanding of what is happening in frontline practice and to drive
improvement. An example of this is the strengthening of child in need (CiN) and
step down processes, which led to a significant reduction in the number of
children on child protection plans.
engage partners well, and provides accurate and detailed evaluation and
analysis of the quality of practice across the partnership. Learning from the
LSCBs quality assurance activity is coordinated by the learning and
improvement group and summarised in a learning and development report, so
that an overview of key lessons can be fed back to agencies, built into training
and taken forward with individual agencies in action plans. The LSCB is
persistent in targeting change and will re-audit key issues to evaluate if there
has been sufficient improvement. One example of this is the use of
chronologies by childrens social care following the last serious case review,
which showed a significant improvement in July 2013 in 64% of cases.
friend reviews of individual agencies. It has carried out six of these in the last
two years, which demonstrates the rigour and persistence of the LSCB in
driving improvement. This process includes reviewing the senior management
arrangements, triangulating this with frontline practice through discussion with
frontline workers and audit of cases. This has helped to identify significant
areas for improvement in agencies, which are taken forward through action
plans overseen by the LSCB. The Section 175 audit revealed that schools had a
very high level of compliance with standards.
been instrumental in raising performance in childrens social care in the use of
history and chronologies, and the quality of engagement of adult mental health
services in safeguarding. Staff spoken to understood the lessons from this SCR
and could relate them to their practice.
threshold for a SCR and makes appropriate decisions around threshold.
However, the local authority has not been reporting serious incidents to Ofsted
in line with requirements and consequently the LSCB has not been notifying the
National Panel of Experts of all decisions not to hold a serious case review. This
meant that these decisions were not scrutinised by the Panel. This is
acknowledged by the LSCB and has now been rectified.


made good progress in delivering its strategy. Through the SEAM Panel it
collates intelligence about CSE across the Trafford area, and has developed a
problem profile to understand links between victims and perpetrators, patterns
and hotspots. This is used by the police to disrupt perpetrators and ensure that
victims receive targeted outreach support. Victims of CSE in Trafford receive
proactive and persistent support through Talk Shop, the Young Womens
Advocate and the Community Change Foundation. This has achieved a high
level of engagement from the young people concerned and is helping to reduce
risks.
Training has been delivered to designated leads in 15 schools, 90% of police
officers, the fire service, 25 elected members and 187 members of the health
service. There are plans to roll out training to all health staff by the end of the
year. All childrens social work teams have a CSE champion to raise awareness.
This has made a demonstrable difference, leading to a sharp rise in the number
of referrals received.
education. There has been good progress on raising awareness and building
resilience amongst children; 85% of children in Year 7 and above have received
advice on CSE at school. The police have provided information to 50 local
businesses and local care homes, and the local authority is planning to raise
awareness with taxis and hoteliers over the course of the year.
and learning from this was used to strengthen information sharing
arrangements with the police. The LSCB is in the process of analysing the
return interviews more fully to identify trends and patterns, to identify how it
can reduce incidents. The LSCB is looking to extend its oversight to children
missing short periods of education during the day.
range of safeguarding training at levels two, three and four as well as an
appropriate range of other key areas such as disabled children, CSE, female
genital mutilation, safeguarding disabled children, honour-based violence and
forced marriage. The LSCB is part of the Greater Manchester Safeguarding
Partnership and uses the procedures developed across Manchester available on
Greater Manchester Safeguarding Children Board web site. These are up to
date, of good quality and cover a comprehensive range of safeguarding areas.
planning and delivery, and this has led to a number of tangible improvements,
such as a 25% increase in school nurses, shorter waiting times for CAMHS
appointments and commissioning of services to support children in school
around anger management.


authorities to cover a population large enough to enable analysis. The annual
report provides analysis of child deaths, and breaks down causes by area
against a range of factors. The most prevalent modifiable causes of child death
are parental smoking and co-sleeping. Trafford has taken steps to ensure that
all new parents receive advice around smoking and co-sleeping from health
visitors, and this is audited. The number of children dying from these is low.
needs to be stronger. Although operational work concerning children around
domestic abuse is robust, the strategic arrangements are currently under
developed. The take-up of services for early help and therapeutic work is low,
and there is a gap in the provision of work with perpetrators. There are high
rates of re-victimisation in some localities and in the cases progressed through
the MARAC process. Also there is an issue with under reporting of domestic
abuse in 16 to 18 year-olds, the Black and minority ethnic community and with
parents. The domestic abuse strategy is recent, having been published in 2013,
and the action plan is still work in progress. The work of the LSCB on the
Prevent strategy is also at a very early stage; it isnt mentioned in the LSCB
annual report or in current training.
that it scrutinises the work of public and private proceedings closely to ensure
that childrens needs are fully met.
analysis of safeguarding performance in Trafford. However, it is too focused on
childrens social care data and doesnt profile local need drawing on the JSNA.
This means that it does not consider how effective the partnership is
strategically in addressing safeguarding need.
critical friend reviews, monitoring of data and CAFs. However, more needs to
be done to develop an effective framework to evaluate the impact of early help
and to raise the use of the CAF by partners. This is being taken forward in
current planning.
anecdotal self-report methods, which do not provide an objective measure of
how well training has influenced and changed practice.
wider community. The use of media and of the Boards lay members role in
making connections with the community is under developed. There is more to
do to engage the faith sector effectively and to embed safeguarding standards
in the work of the voluntary and community sector.


What the inspection judgements mean
The local authority
An outstanding local authority leads highly effective services that contribute to
significantly improved outcomes for children and young people who need help and
protection and care. Their progress exceeds expectations and is sustained over time.
A good local authority leads effective services that help, protect and care for
children and young people and those who are looked after and care leavers have
their welfare safeguarded and promoted.
In a local authority that requires improvement, there are no widespread or
serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of harm. The
welfare of looked after children is safeguarded and promoted. Minimum
requirements are in place, however, the authority is not yet delivering good
protection, help and care for children, young people and families.
A local authority that is inadequate is providing services where there are
widespread or serious failures that create or leave children being harmed or at risk of
harm or result in children looked after or care leavers not having their welfare
safeguarded and promoted.

The LSCB
An outstanding LSCB is highly influential in improving the care and protection of
children. Their evaluation of performance is exceptional and helps the local authority
and its partners to understand the difference that services make and where they
need to improve. The LSCB creates and fosters an effective learning culture.
An LSCB that is good coordinates the activity of statutory partners and monitors the
effectiveness of local arrangements. Multi-agency training in the protection and care
of children is effective and evaluated regularly for impact. The LSCB provides robust
and rigorous evaluation and analysis of local performance that identifies areas for
improvement and influences the planning and delivery of high-quality services.
An LSCB requires improvement if it does not yet demonstrate the characteristics
of good.
An LSCB that is inadequate does not demonstrate that it has effective
arrangements in place and the required skills to discharge its statutory functions. It
does not understand the experiences of children and young people locally and fails to
identify where improvements can be made.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of six of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from Ofsted
and two addition inspectors.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Gary Lamb
Deputy lead inspector: Lynn Radley
Team inspectors: Sheena Doyle, Simon Rushall, Ali Mekki, Katheryn Gethin, Dean
Jennings (Additional Inspector) and Judith Nelson (Additional Inspector)
Quality assurance manager: Simone White


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.ofsted.gov.uk. If you would like Ofsted to send you a copy of the guidance, please
telephone 0300123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and children's social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, work
based learning and skills training, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons
and other secure establishments. It inspects services for looked after children and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may copy all or parts of this document for non-commercial educational purposes, as long as you
give details of the source and date of publication and do not alter the information in any way.
To receive regular email alerts about new publications please visit our website and go to Subscribe.
Piccadilly Gate
Store St
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2015


