City of Wolverhampton
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 16 January 2017 to 9 February 2017
Report published: 31 March 2017

Childrens services in Wolverhampton are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good


Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Senior managers, leaders, and elected members are systematically driving
improvements in services for children and families. Corporate leadership is strong
and effective. With a clear sense of vision and purpose, and by focusing on key
priorities, senior managers, leaders and elected members are using performance
management information to monitor and track performance, and deliver better
outcomes for children across a range of different areas.
Early help services have been reconfigured in such a way as to bring together
strengthening family workers with health visitors, midwives and social workers in
eight community-based hubs. Although it is too early to evaluate the full impact of
this new service model, parents told inspectors that it is making a difference to them
and their families and that, increasingly, they are able to get the right help, in the
right way, at the right time.
The multi-agency safeguarding hub (MASH) provides a robust and effective service
at the first point of contact. With good links to the emergency duty team, timely
information-sharing and robust management oversight, the MASH ensures that
appropriate action is taken to safeguard and protect children and young people,
including those who go missing and/or are at risk of being sexually exploited.
Good and sustained improvements have been made across the whole range of
services for children looked after. Edge-of-care services are targeted effectively to
prevent avoidable family breakdown. As a result, children only become looked after
when it is right that they should.
Most children come into care in a planned way. Permanence planning starts early.
The number of children looked after has been significantly reduced without
compromising childrens safety. A strong and effective virtual school is delivering
positive outcomes for children looked after. Most children are living in stable
placements.
The local authority takes its responsibilities as a corporate parent very seriously. The
Children in Care Council and the care leavers forum have been influential in shaping
the way in which services are developed and delivered.
Good use is made of adoption to achieve permanence for those children for whom it
is the right solution. This includes older children and those with complex needs,
regardless of their ethnic identity. The timeliness of legal proceedings, and of
matching and placing children with adoptive families, is improving.
Care leavers receive a good, individualised service, which prepares them well for
independence. They say that they feel valued and are listened to. Too many care
leavers are not in education, employment or training, but appropriate action is being
taken and the position is improving. All care leavers live in suitable accommodation.


However, the help and protection which children and young people receive require
improvement to be good. The quality of analysis, assessments and plans, including
child in need and child protection plans, is variable. The childs voice is not given
sufficient prominence or consistently clearly articulated in case files. The level of
critical challenge provided by frontline managers is not consistently robust. Some
children are not getting the help and support that they need quickly enough.
The local authority has recognised the need to rationalise its performance
management information and make sure that the balanced scorecard provides a
clear line of sight on all aspects of frontline practice. Further work is also required to
embed fully the quality assurance framework.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Recommendations


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one registered short-break childrens home, which
was inspected in November 2016 and judged as requires improvement.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys arrangements for the protection of
children was in June 2011. The local authority was judged to be adequate.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was
also in June 2011. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The director of childrens services (DCS) has been in post since January 2015.
 The DCS is also responsible for adult services and public health, though not
directly for education.
 The chair of the Local Safeguarding Children Board has been in post since
February 2013.
Children living in this area
 Approximately 58,167 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in Wolverhampton. This is 22.9% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 30% of the local authoritys children are living in low-income
families.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 20.5% (the national average is 14.5%)
 in secondary schools is 19.7% (the national average is 13.2%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 41.6% of all
children living in the area, compared to 21.5% in the country.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian or Asian British, followed by Mixed (20.6% and 11.3% respectively).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 27.2% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 22.5% (the national average is 15.7%).


The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


 Wolverhampton is very diverse and has the second-highest Sikh population in the
country.
Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 354 children and young people per 10,000 population
(2,042) had been identified through assessment as being formally in need of a
specialist childrens service. This is a reduction from both 403 per 10,000 (2,341)
at 31 March 2016 and 489 per 10,000 (2,017) at 31 March 2015.
 At 30 September 2016, 36 children and young people per 10,000 (209) were the
subject of a child protection plan. This is an increase from 26 per 10,000 (152) at
 At 30 September 2016, the number of children living in a privately arranged
fostering placement was suppressed due to the very low numbers.
 Between the last inspection in 2011 and 30 September 2016, 11 serious incident
notifications were submitted to Ofsted and six serious case reviews (SCRs)
completed. Two SCRs were ongoing at the time of this inspection.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 626 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 109 per 10,000). This is a reduction from 655 (112 per
number:
authority area
 there were four unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.
 In the last 12 months:
 there have been 40 adoptions
returned to be looked after
independent living
 no children and young people who ceased to be looked after are living in
houses in multiple occupation.


Recommendations

Ensure that management oversight at the frontline is appropriately
challenging and consistent, and that frontline managers are able to use the
new case file audit tool effectively.


Strengthen the line of sight which senior managers, leaders and elected
members have on frontline practice, by including detailed information about
children in need whose cases are being held by team managers, or managed
on duty, prior to being allocated to a named social worker.


Ensure that children looked after who are living at a distance from
Wolverhampton receive the same high level of health and educational support
as children living closer to home.


Ensure that, when children and young people are placed with family and
friends, social workers are clear about what actions must be completed to
assess and formalise those arrangements in line with placement regulations.


Ensure that all assessments include a consistently robust analysis of risks and
protective factors, resulting in child in need and child protection plans which
are specific, measurable and easy for children and parents to understand.


Ensure that greater prominence is given in case files to the thoughts, wishes
and feelings of children and young people, so that the childs voice is clearly
recorded and understood.


Strengthen advocacy arrangements to ensure that children in need of help
and protection and their parents, and children looked after, are enabled to
make a meaningful contribution to child in need and child protection
processes, and children looked after reviews.


Ensure that children looked after who would benefit from one have access to
an independent visitor.


Ensure that all personal education plans are specific, measurable and easy for
children and young people to understand.


Ensure that all pathway plans include targets which are specific, measurable
and written in such a way that there is no room for ambiguity about who
needs to do what, by when, to ensure that care leavers are able to make a
successful transition to independence.


Ensure that once children are placed with adoptive families there is no
unnecessary delay in applying for an adoption order.


Summary for children and young people
 Senior managers, leaders and elected members are working well together, and in
partnership with the Children in Care Council and the care leavers forum, to
improve services for children and young people who need help and protection,
children who are looked after and care leavers.
 The new strengthening families hubs are making it easier for children and families
to get the help and support that they need in the right way and at the right time.
 Senior managers and leaders are working well with their partners to make sure
that children who are at risk of harm are safeguarded and protected.
 When children go missing and/or are at risk of being sexually exploited, partners
and professionals know what they need to do and work well together to manage
and reduce the risks.
 When families are struggling, the intensive support that they are given helps to
prevent family breakdown.
 Some children who are not at immediate risk have to wait for the help and
support that they need. Senior managers, leaders and elected members know
about this and are already doing something about it.
 Child protection conference chairs and independent reviewing officers are good at
making sure that children and young people get the right help, support and
protection.
 Senior managers and leaders are taking action to make sure that children and
young people are properly involved in social work assessments, and that plans
take full account of what children and young people think and feel.
 Senior managers are making sure that only those children who need to be looked
after come into care.
 There are far fewer children being looked after now than there were two years
ago. Most children looked after are living in settled and stable placements.
 When children are not able to live safely with their birth families, adoption is
carefully considered for all children, including older children and children with
complex needs.
 Although some children still wait too long to be adopted, this is getting better.
 Care leavers are getting good support to prepare them for independence.
 All care leavers are living in suitable accommodation and are given good
information about their rights and things that they are entitled to.
 Although too many care leavers are not in education, employment or training,
action is being taken to address this and it is getting better.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
Early help services have been reconfigured to ensure that children and families
have effective help when needs and/or concerns are first identified. As well as
improving the quality and timeliness of information-sharing and increasing
opportunities for joint working, these new arrangements mean that cases can be
stepped up or down quickly in response to changing circumstances. Parents talk
very positively about the help and support that they receive and are able to
describe the difference that this makes to them and their families.
Good partnership working and effective management oversight in the multi-agency
safeguarding hub ensure a timely and effective response to contacts and referrals
about children. Thresholds are applied appropriately. Proportionate and effective
action is taken to safeguard and protect children who are at risk of significant
harm. Strategy meetings and child protection investigations are timely and
thorough. The emergency duty team provides an effective out-of-hours service.
In the majority of cases seen, partner agencies work well together to protect
children who are the subject of child protection plans. Child protection conferences
and core groups are effective. Child protection chairs provide an appropriate level
of scrutiny and critical challenge. Arrangements to safeguard and protect children
who go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation are robust and well
coordinated. Multi-agency responses consistently improve outcomes for children
and young people.
An increase in referrals since the start of 2016 means that some children in need,
including children with disabilities, are having to wait for their needs to be fully
assessed. Senior managers are aware of this and have taken action to increase the
capacity of the multi-agency enquiry team to enable it to carry out all initial
assessments of need, as well as child protection enquiries.
The local authority is taking appropriate action to improve the quality and
consistency of social work practice, including the quality of analysis, assessments
and plans, while at the same time giving greater prominence to the voice of the
child in case records. The quality of frontline management, which is not yet
consistently robust, is also being strengthened
Intensive family support, targeted at children on the edge of care, is effective in
preventing avoidable family breakdown. Good use is made of family group
conferences to enable families to understand the needs of their children better and
identify strategies to improve parenting.


Inspection findings

Family support workers, referred to as strengthening family workers, are
making a real difference in the lives of children and families. The local
authority has recently reconfigured its early intervention services to create
eight locality-based strengthening families hubs. With strengthening family
workers sitting alongside social workers, under the same roof as health
visitors and midwives and, in one case, a police officer, the quality and
timeliness of information-sharing have improved. As well as increasing
opportunities for joint working, the hubs are helping to create a real sense of
synergy. Although it is too soon to evaluate the full impact of these new
arrangements, the early help and support that children and families receive is,
in most cases, timely.


The quality of early help assessments is variable. All are at least adequate,
and some are good. Early help plans are well targeted, set out clear
expectations of parents and professionals, and provide clear timescales.
Parents talked enthusiastically about the help and support that they receive.
In addition to practical assistance and emotional support, the parents value
being helped to navigate their way through complex legal and other systems
and supported to access services which otherwise they would not have known
about. They particularly appreciate the fact that as you get more confident,
the support gradually gets less. A young person, whose mother had escaped
from a life of domestic abuse, said: They [the hubs] are very important; you
cant knock them.


The co-location of strengthening families and safeguarding teams means that
as risks and/or needs increase or decrease, cases are swiftly stepped up or
down between early help and childrens social care. Local partnership
managers, each of whom is responsible for managing two strengthening
families hubs, chair regular weekly, face-to-face meetings of early intervention
and social work unit managers. Thresholds for escalating cases from early
help to social care are well understood and consistently applied.


Good partnership working means that children who are at risk of significant
harm are promptly identified. Decisive action is taken to safeguard and protect
them. Established 12 months ago, the multi-agency safeguarding hub
provides an effective single point of contact. Partners are generally clear
about thresholds for access to childrens social care services and understand
the referral pathways, including those involving children who go missing or
are at risk of sexual exploitation. The quality of referrals to the MASH is
appropriate in most cases. Robust management oversight ensures that
decision-making in the MASH is timely. The percentage of repeat referrals has
fallen significantly, demonstrating that the local authority is getting better at
responding well first time to the needs of children and families.


The emergency duty team is well resourced and responds effectively to the
needs of children and families out of hours and at weekends. The interface


between the out-of-hours service and daytime social work teams is strong.
Information is shared effectively.

Child protection investigations carried out by the multi-agency enquiry team
(MAET) are thorough. Strategy discussions and meetings are timely, share
information effectively and ensure that initial enquiries are completed without
delay. Although the rationale for decisions taken or action agreed is not
always clearly recorded, the local authority and its partners work well together
to ensure that children are safe.


Most children who meet the threshold for statutory intervention receive a
timely response, but a small minority of children in need, including children
with disabilities, have to wait before being seen. An increase in the number of
contacts and referrals since the start of last year is putting pressure on social
work teams. Senior managers, leaders and elected members are aware of this
and have taken action to double the size of the MAET so that it has the
capacity to complete all initial assessments of children in need, as well as child
protection enquiries. In the short term, social work unit managers in the
strengthening families hubs are having to hold some child in need cases
themselves and/or manage them on duty. Inspectors did not find any
evidence to indicate that any of the children and families that are waiting for
help and support are at immediate risk. (Recommendation)


Most assessments are detailed and comprehensive, but the quality of analysis
is variable. Although risks and protective factors are identified, their impact is
not always clearly articulated. This has the potential to blunt the effectiveness
of the help and protection provided. (Recommendation)


The timeliness of initial child protection conferences (ICPCs) is good, and the
local authoritys own figures show that a high proportion of ICPCs now result
in a child protection plan. Most conferences are well attended and information
is shared effectively. In most cases, child protection conference chairs provide
effective critical challenge. Core groups meetings are also well attended and
are effective in keeping children safe.


The local authority recognises the need to increase the level of advocacy
support available to enable parents and children to engage meaningfully in
child protection conferences. In those cases when advocates are used,
childrens views are well represented, giving them and their parents greater
influence over key decisions that affect them. (Recommendation)


The quality of child in need and child protection plans is variable. Although
inspectors saw some good examples of intelligent and effective plans, the
weaker examples are not sufficiently specific or outcome focused, and are
inclined to focus on the adults rather than the children. Contingency plans are
not well developed and this makes it difficult for parents to understand fully
what they need to do, by when, and the consequences of not doing so.



Thresholds for stepping cases up or down are well understood and are applied
appropriately in most cases. However, in a small minority of cases, once
children have been stepped down from child protection to child in need plans,
arrangements for monitoring sustained improvement are not sufficiently
robust. Management oversight of decisions to dispense with a child protection
plan after the first review child protection conference has recently been
strengthened to ensure that children are not exposed unnecessarily to risk.


Most case records seen are up to date, but case records do not always make
it clear that children have been seen alone, even when they have been. While
in most cases the childs age, ethnicity and gender are recorded, case records
do not always give a clear sense of what life is like for the child or provide a
clear sense of the childs unique identity. Chronologies and genograms are
evident in most case files, but their quality varies. Although social workers
know children well, the voice of the child is not consistently given due
prominence. Recognising this, senior managers are in the process of rolling
out a preferred social work model to make sure that in future children are
always at the centre of assessment and planning processes.
(Recommendation)


The quality and rigour of management oversight at the frontline is not
consistently good. Inspectors saw examples of purposeful and effective
management scrutiny leading to improved outcomes for children, but not all
frontline managers are sufficiently robust in monitoring progress or
challenging the quality of social work practice. (Recommendation)


Staff turnover, which has been relatively high, has improved and is now less
of an issue. Fewer changes of personnel mean that children are more likely to
be able to establish meaningful relationships with their social workers. Some
social workers are making good use of direct work tools to find out what
children think and feel.


Partner agencies work well together to ensure that the risks associated with
children who are exposed to domestic violence are identified and assessed.
Multi-agency risk assessment conferences (MARAC) arrangements are robust
and well embedded. Information is shared effectively and thresholds applied
appropriately. However, representatives from adult services are not always
able to attend. This has the potential to undermine the effectiveness of the
MARAC process. Effective multi-agency public protection arrangements ensure
that offenders who are living in the community are appropriately supervised
and that potential risks to children are closely monitored.


Arrangements to monitor the welfare of children who are living with parents
who are experiencing problems with their mental health, misusing drugs or
alcohol, or when domestic violence is an issue are generally robust. Effective
collaboration between partner agencies ensures that in most cases children
are appropriately safeguarded. Children experiencing neglect are mostly well


monitored and cases are escalated in a timely manner, as and when
necessary.

Young people aged 16 and 17 who present as homeless are being well served.
A clear and effective joint protocol ensures that these young peoples needs
are carefully assessed and suitable accommodation offered, if appropriate.


At times of crisis, when families are really struggling and there is a danger
that children may end up having to come into care, high-quality intensive
family support is provided to try to prevent avoidable family breakdown. Good
use is made of family group conferences to help parents and children better
understand the impact of their behaviour on each other, build resilience and
mobilise support from the wider family network. Children and parents receive
timely and well-targeted outreach support, which includes a short-break
service if necessary. Sixty-three families (104 children) are currently being
supported in this way. In the vast majority of cases, this imaginative and
creative response results in improved outcomes for children and families.


Working closely with the police, the local authority has strengthened its
response to children who go missing from home, school or care. Information
and intelligence are shared effectively between childrens social care and the
police. The local authoritys dedicated missing return officer, who is
responsible for completing return home interviews (RHIs) living within a 20mile radius of Wolverhampton, sits alongside behaviour and attendance
officers and the elective home education officer. Whenever an RHI is
undertaken, the child sexual exploitation screening tool is also completed.
Completed RHIs are routinely uploaded to the electronic case recording
system. The number and quality of RHIs have improved significantly. In
October 2016, 93% of missing episodes resulted in an RHI, of which 87%
were completed within 72 hours.


Robust strategic and operational arrangements are in place to identify,
manage and reduce the risks associated with child sexual exploitation. Multiagency sexual exploitation (MASE) meetings focus on individual children, and
support is provided to ensure that, whenever possible, they and their parents
are able to participate in the MASE meetings and be involved in co-producing
risk management plans. With high levels of awareness, good use of the child
sexual exploitation screening tool and a dedicated child sexual exploitation
coordinator, the emphasis is on early intervention. Although the number of
children identified as being at risk of child sexual exploitation has increased,
the local authority and its partners are able to demonstrate their success in
preventing the escalation, and successfully reducing, the level of risks.


Children who are electively home educated are monitored effectively. The
local authority is in touch with all of these families and carries out regular
reviews to track childrens progress. The progress and attainment of children
in alternative provision are also rigorously monitored to ensure that children
receive a good education.



With training for professionals and clear protocols in place, there is a high
level of awareness of female genital mutilation. Girls who are identified as
being at potential risk receive a timely, protective response.


Although Wolverhampton is not a Prevent priority area, robust arrangements
are in place to meet the challenge of, and manage the risks associated with,
radicalisation. With clear links to both the Children and Adult Safeguarding
Boards, radicalisation is recognised as an integral part of safeguarding. Good
levels of awareness and effective coordination ensure that activity is
purposeful and targeted, and that young people who are considered to be at
risk are identified.


It is too soon to evaluate the impact of recent activity to raise awareness of
private fostering. Although a multi-agency private fostering forum has been
established, currently there are only two recognised private fostering
arrangements in Wolverhampton. This means that the local authority and its
partners cannot be confident that they are effectively safeguarding all children
and young people who are living with adults to whom they are not related.


The local authority and its partners take allegations of the abuse of children
and young people by professionals very seriously. Position of trust meetings
are well chaired and result in effective, well-coordinated and well-managed
responses, ensuring that children are appropriately safeguarded and
protected. The designated officer has been proactive in meeting with a range
of professionals and community leaders to ensure that they understand his
role and function, and are clear about their safeguarding responsibilities.


The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
Wolverhampton has adopted a very child-centred approach to children looked
after. With a clear strategic vision, robust arrangements to monitor and track
progress, and some very sensitive and thoughtful work with individual children, the
local authority is delivering improved outcomes for children and young people.
The vast majority of children looked after live in secure and stable homes and,
when appropriate, have well-supported contact with their families. A combination
of clear permanence plans and good-quality direct work help children and young
people to make sense of their history and experiences. The attainment of children
is good. In Wolverhampton, children looked after outperform their peers.
The number of children looked after has been safely reduced. Only those children
who need it become looked after. Effective management oversight ensures that
most children come into care in a planned way, rather than in an emergency.
When children return home to their birth families, this is also well planned, and
appropriate support is provided to ensure that children are safe.
Some aspects of the service are particularly impressive, including the strength of
the local authoritys partnership with the Children in Care Council, the stable
influence and expert guidance provided by independent reviewing officers, the
widespread positive impact of the virtual school, and the work that is being
undertaken to reduce offending and re-offending behaviour. The individual needs
of children are carefully considered. Permanence planning is a real strength.
Further work is required to ensure greater consistency in the quality of care plans
and assessments. The local authority also needs to ensure that children placed at a
distance receive a consistently good service and that more children are supported
by an advocate or an independent visitor.
Adoption is carefully considered for a broad range of children. The number of
children placed for adoption is relatively high. Effective management oversight
means that timeliness, in relation to all aspects of the adoption scorecard, is
improving. Adopter recruitment is timely. Adopters value the support provided both
before and after children have been placed. Disruptions rarely occur.
Transition planning starts early. Young peoples advisers provide effective all-round
support for care leavers to prepare them for independence. Care leavers, all of
whom are living in suitable accommodation, talk very positively of the help and
advice that they receive. They understand their rights and entitlements, and feel
listened to. Although not enough care leavers are in education, employment or
training, effective action means that the position is improving.


Inspection findings

Children are listened to. Their voices are heard and acted on. Examples
include: a child whose contact arrangements were safely increased as a result
of what the child had told their therapist; a disruption meeting that was
organised in direct response to the young person saying that they were
unhappy in their placement; and the use of MOMO (Mind of my own)
technology to enable a child with disabilities to express their thoughts and
feelings about their recent experiences.


Thresholds to care are well understood and consistently applied, ensuring that
only children who need to become looked after do so. Since March 2015,
when 780 children were being looked after, the local authority has managed
to achieve a significant reduction in the size of the care population without
compromising childrens safety. At the time of this inspection, 635 children
were being looked after. When children no longer need to be looked after, the
local authority provides an appropriate level of intervention and support to
ensure that they are able to return home safely to their birth families. Very
few children return to care. Of the current care population, only five children
have become looked after for a second or subsequent time.


Most children come into care in a planned way. The local authority is working
well with families and the courts to ensure that the majority of children
become looked after as a result of formal legal proceedings rather than in an
emergency. This allows more time to engage in meaningful work with children
and families, and to make sure that they understand what is happening and
why. Voluntary accommodation is rarely used, except when this is the most
appropriate option.


Management oversight has been strengthened to ensure that permanency
planning starts early for children looked after. Senior managers are directly
involved in the weekly admission to care panel and the management oversight
panel, which monitors and reviews plans for individual children to avoid drift
or delay. As a permanent member of the admission to care panel, the
adoption team manager has a clear line of sight on new entrants to the care
system. While inspectors observed a degree of variability in frontline
management oversight, this was generally stronger for the children most
recently looked after, and was present for the majority of children.


The local authority has taken decisive action to address the high number of
children who previously were living at home with parents while still the
subject of full care orders. The placement with parents team works with
children and families to ensure that the level of intervention and support is
appropriate, and that children are safe and secure. When care orders are
revoked, children and families continue to receive help and support, either as
children in need or through early intervention, as appropriate. The vast
majority of children whose orders have been revoked have remained in the


care of their parents. Two years ago, 89 children were living at home on care
orders. Now there are only 36.

The quality and timeliness of court work has improved significantly as a result
of concerted action by the local authority. Applications to court, court
statements and letters before proceedings are generally of a consistently good
quality. Court work seen was well evidenced and analytical. The timeliness of
care proceedings has improved considerably. The majority of recent
proceedings have been completed within 26 weeks. However, legacy issues
continue to have an impact on performance.


When it is not safe for children to remain with their birth families, every effort
is made to find out whether it is possible for them to live with extended family
members or friends, if it is in childrens best interest to do so. Viability
assessments are of a high quality, and are analytical, comprehensive and
respectful of the individual circumstances of family members. This
commitment to explore wider family options has resulted in a very small
number of children living with family and friends for a considerable period of
time before their placements have been properly assessed or formalised. The
local authority recognises that it needs to revise its permanence policy to
make sure that it provides a clear and unambiguous explanation of the
process, and what is expected and required in such situations.
(Recommendation)


Positive working relationships with Children and Family Court Advisory and
Support Service and the local judiciary facilitate open and flexible discussion of
complex practice issues. Well supported by its legal team, the local authority
rigorously tracks its use of the Public Law Outline and monitors the progress
of all court-related work to avoid unnecessary delay. As evidence of the
effective grip that it has on court work, the local authority is rarely called to
account for their practice at compliance court meetings with the local
judiciary.


Children looked after have regular visits from their social workers, who
routinely see them alone. As at November 2016, 90% of visits to children
looked after were competed on time. Improved stability in the workforce also
means that children looked after are experiencing few changes of social
worker. This has been confirmed by the Children in Care Council (CiCC), the
foster carer group and the corporate parenting board. Workforce stability
makes it easier for children to come to know and trust their social workers.


Children looked after benefit from the dedicated support provided by the child
and adolescent mental health services. This includes direct work with children
and young people, as well as advice and guidance for their carers and social
workers. There is also a good range of local services specifically to support
children and young people with issues relating to drugs or alcohol.



Independent reviewing officers (IROs) are effective in driving improvements in
practice and performance, leading to better outcomes for children looked
after. A stable and experienced team of IROs has been given additional
resources, including a dedicated foster carer reviewing officer, to ensure that
IROs are able to continue to deliver a high-quality service. At the time of this
inspection, 90% of reviews had been completed on time. Children and young
people are well engaged in the review process, and 92% of them participate
in their reviews. Although there is still some variability in practice, the majority
of care plans are clear, concise, up to date and outcome-focused.


Children looked after do as well or better than their Wolverhampton peers in
terms of educational outcomes and, at key stage 2, significantly better than
the national average for children looked after. This is an impressive
achievement and reflects the work of a well-resourced and well-led virtual
school. With only a very few exceptions, children looked after have good
school attendance records, and for most this is 90% or above. However,
children looked after who are living outside of the citys boundaries are doing
less well. The virtual head has put additional resources in place to address
this.


Eighty per cent of children looked after attend schools that are judged as
good or outstanding. Decisions about whether or not to move a child whose
school is rated as less than good are made on an individual case-by-case
basis. Almost one fifth of children looked after achieve five GCSEs A* to C
including English and mathematics. Although similar to last year, this is below
the national average for all pupils. The virtual school has identified additional
resources to support children this year. At the point at which they leave
school, nearly half of children looked after do so with some GCSEs or
equivalent qualifications, and at that point 90% of them progress into further
education, employment or training.


Most children looked after have a personal education plan (PEP). However,
while PEPs ensure that pupils receive appropriate help and support, they are
not consistently child-centred. PEP targets are not always written in a way
that makes them easy for children or their carers to understand. Further work
is required to strengthen the quality assurance process to ensure that PEPs
are appropriately ambitious and accessible. (Recommendation)


The pupil premium is used effectively to support children looked after to
achieve their academic potential and promote their social and emotional wellbeing. The use of the pupil premium is systematically reviewed as part of the
PEP planning process. Currently, 86 children looked after have education,
health and care plans, which are also reviewed during PEP visits.


Children looked after are actively encouraged to pursue higher education. A
programme targeted at Year 7 students is designed to raise the aspirations of
young people. Although still relatively new, the early indications are that this
is having the desired effect and that more children looked after are expressing


an interest in going to university. Good information-sharing arrangements with
local further education establishments ensure that young people are well
supported. The average level of attainment of children looked after who
attend the local college is better than their peers.

Alternative education provision is used appropriately to re-engage young
people until a long-term educational solution is found. The local authority
carries out regular quality assurance visits to ensure that providers meet the
required standards.


Work is ongoing to try to make sure that children, including children looked
after, understand how to keep themselves safe when accessing social media.
E-safety and bullying, including cyber bullying, are addressed as part of an
initiative involving schools, the local authority and virtual school staff.


With a suitable range of placement options available, most children looked
after live in secure and settled homes. Placement stability is good and
improving (71% of children looked after have had the same placement for
more than two-and-a-half years). In the case of those children who have
experienced a number of moves, the local authoritys response has been
appropriate.


The Wolverhampton Children and Young People Sufficiency Strategy 2017
childrens social care. A targeted recruitment plan means that the local
authority has a sufficient number of suitably trained foster carers to meet the
needs of children looked after. It also has a good range of in-house and
independently provided emergency options. The range of supported
accommodation services for vulnerable 16- and 17-year-olds has been
enhanced. Foster carers talk very positively about the quality and flexibility of
the support that they receive, which is supplemented by a buddy system and
a mens group for male carers. Foster carers also comment favourably on the
advice and support that they are given to help them to manage contact
arrangements successfully.


Childrens needs for permanence are carefully considered at an early stage. In
the vast majority of cases, permanence plans are in place following the
second looked after review. The local authority makes effective use of a
number of different tracker tools to avoid drift or delay in achieving
permanence for children and young people through adoption, a special
guardianship order (SGO) or long-term fostering. Children, families and carers
are given a clear picture of what will happen and when.


When permanency is achieved by way of an SGO, this is based on a thorough
analytical assessment, a comprehensive support plan, and an appropriate
period of training and support prior to the application to court. The quality of
this work is good. Although the number of SGOs is still relatively low, progress


is being driven by two dedicated SGO workers and a long-term fostering
worker as part of a targeted improvement plan.

A clear policy commitment ensures that foster-to-adopt placements are
increasingly being used to good effect to provide continuity and, at the same
time, minimise delay for children in need of permanence. Since November
child, have benefited from foster-to-adopt placements. This is particularly
impressive.


Advocacy is provided through a commissioned service but, although its use is
routinely considered, the number of children looked after who are receiving
advocacy support is low, and there is a waiting list for children requiring an
independent visitor. At the time of this inspection, 16 children looked after
had an advocate. Nine children had an independent visitor, with a further 11
children on the waiting list. (Recommendation)


The individual and separate needs of brothers and sisters are carefully
considered and assessed. A high proportion of brothers and sisters are living
together in permanent placements, including, for example, a group of five
siblings. This means that, whenever possible, children are enabled to grow up
together, safe in their shared family identities. When, because of their
assessed needs, brothers and sisters end up living apart, they have the same
IRO and great care is taken to ensure that contact is maintained at the right
level for them, regardless of the distance involved.


Child permanence reports appropriately assess and analyse childrens needs
for lifelong security, provide a strong sense of each childs unique identity, and
clearly reflect childrens wishes and feelings. Other assessments of childrens
needs are more variable, though always of an adequate standard. Although
social workers know children well and are clearly able to articulate their
needs, not every child has an up-to-date assessment. (Recommendation)


While considerable effort is being made to ensure that the needs of children
looked after who are living out of the local area are met, this is not always the
case. Although children living locally receive good health support, the looked
after children steering group and the corporate parenting board are focusing
on the need to improve health outcomes for children placed at a distance.
This is particularly relevant in the case of the 80 children looked after who are
living in placements more than 50 miles away from Wolverhampton. While
these children are appropriately placed and are well served by the virtual
school, their overall experiences are more variable, ranging from an
outstanding service to one which requires improvement. (Recommendation)


The local authoritys engagement with the CiCC is anything but tokenistic.
Participation is strong. An impressive, well-integrated and influential group of
young people, the CiCC is able to provide tangible evidence of its impact. As
well as running total respect training courses for social workers, councillors


and social work students, members are involved as a matter of course in the
recruitment and selection of social work managers and staff. Reports to the
corporate parenting board are routinely scrutinised and agreed by the CiCC
before they are presented to the board. The authors of those reports are
required to attend the CiCC in person and, on a number of occasions, have
had to amend their reports in line with feedback from the CiCC. When
inspectors met with members of the CiCC, every young person said that they
felt that they had been listened to.
The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good


The local authority uses performance information well to monitor and track
prospective adopters and children through their adoption journeys.
Comprehensive monthly performance management reports, which include an
adoption pipeline and permanency tracker, provide detailed information on
progress and timeliness.


Good performance and positive outcomes for children are evidenced by the
high number of children securing permanence through adoption. In 2015
care during that period. In the 12 months prior to this inspection, 45 children
were adopted. Disruptions are extremely rare.


Children who are older or have complex needs are successfully placed for
adoption, which means that they have the opportunity to build and benefit
from secure families and attachments. Wolverhampton achieves permanence
through adoption for more harder to place children than similar local
authorities. Currently, 10 children with disabilities and 25 children over the
age of five have a plan for adoption.


Although the average length of time taken between children becoming looked
after and moving in with their adoptive families is above the national average,
there is an improving picture. Children are increasingly benefiting from being
placed more quickly with their prospective adoptive families.


The time it takes to match children with their prospective adopters is reducing
steadily, although children in Wolverhampton wait comparatively longer than
the national average. The local authority continues to maintain a strong focus
on this. Its own, unvalidated data demonstrates continued improvement in this
area.


The adoption team has a detailed understanding and knowledge of all of the
children who have been assessed as needing to achieve permanence through
adoption. The team undertakes a successful and creative range of familyfinding activity. Having identified shortfalls in its ability to recruit prospective
adopters to meet the needs of some children, the local authority has


developed a comprehensive marketing and recruitment strategy to address
the issue.

The importance of planning early for permanence is well understood.
Fostering to adopt is well embedded and is routinely discussed with
prospective adopters. Inspectors saw examples of a number of children who
were living in foster placements with prospective adopters in order to help
them to develop strong and secure attachments at the earliest possible stage.
Adopters talk very positively about the helpful support that they receive.


Recognising the importance of placing brothers and sisters together whenever
possible, the local authority carefully considers the needs of brother and sister
groups. Inspectors saw good evidence of brothers and sisters being placed
together as a result of due weight and prominence having been given to the
importance of these enduring relationships. Although the quality of together
or apart assessments seen by inspectors was variable, the recommendations
arrived at were appropriate and consistent with the childrens needs.


In the 12 months prior to this inspection, seven children who had had a plan
for adoption had their plans rescinded. Case sampling confirmed that all of the
decisions to move away from adoption were appropriate and met the
childrens identified needs. An immediate permanent alternative option was
available for all of these children, although there was a slight delay in securing
permanence for some of them with their existing carers.


Children and families receive good-quality post-adoption support. A wide
range of relevant training is provided by adoption support social workers on
subjects ranging from non-violent resistance to dyadic developmental
psychotherapy and therapeutic parenting. Creative use is made of the
adoption support fund to deliver bespoke packages of care. Adopters talked
very positively about the training that they had received, and made it clear
that they value the support and responsiveness of the adoption team.


Inspectors saw some particularly good examples of life-story, moving-on work
and later-life letters. These were all sensitive, purposeful and child-centred,
designed to help children understand and prepare for their adoption journey.
Life-story books are attractively presented, include photographs and
information about childrens birth families, and reflect each childs unique
cultural identity.


Childrens files evidence parallel planning as well as comprehensive
assessments which inform final permanence decisions. In a small number of
cases, once children are placed a delay in applying for adoption orders means
that legal permanence for these children and their adoptive families is not
secured in a timely manner. (Recommendation)


The adoption team is careful to ensure that adopters are suitable and wellprepared. The majority of prospective adopters are assessed in a timely way.


However, while prospective adopter reports (PARs) seen by inspectors were of
a consistently high quality, the adoption panel process has highlighted some
variability in the quality of PARs. The local authority is taking appropriate
action to strengthen its quality assurance process.

With an experienced and knowledgeable chair and an appropriately broad
membership, the adoption panel provides an appropriate level of critical
scrutiny, and is not afraid to challenge the quality of prospective adopter or
child permanence reports. Agency decisions are appropriate and timely. The
agency decision maker demonstrates a high level of knowledge and
understanding of adoption work and a clear commitment to children. The local
authority has plans to strengthen further the relationship between senior
managers and the adoption panel.


The local authority is an active member of the Black Country consortium, and
this adds capacity and scope to the services provided by the authority. After
Adoption provides appropriate and effective services on behalf of the
consortium, including support to birth mothers whose children have been
placed for adoption. All adopters are provided with membership of Adoption
UK and are referred to the adoption register within timescales. Adopters told
inspectors that they feel well supported by the local authority.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

Works begins early with children looked after to help them plan and prepare
for independence. The transitions team starts to build relationships with
young people from the age of 14 onwards. Young peoples advisers (YPAs)
work alongside the childs social worker until the young person turns 16, at
which point YPAs take over. This approach provides continuity and avoids
young people having to re-tell their stories and/or having to come to know
someone new at a critical point in their lives. Young people talk very positively
about their YPAs, and about the help and support, advice and guidance which
YPAs provide.


YPAs are in touch with all care leavers, know them well and provide an
effective wrap-around service in response to young peoples individual social
and emotional, health and accommodation needs. When risks or needs
increase, YPAs are proactive in mobilising additional support, including, for
example, by referring young people to the multi-agency safeguarding hub if
they go missing or are potentially at risk of being sexually exploited. Regular
Friday drop-in sessions mean that care leavers are able to talk to a social
worker, a YPA or the education, employment or training (EET) coordinator
about issues or concerns as they arise.



Every care leaver has a pathway plan, although the quality of these plans is
variable. Young people appreciate being involved in co-producing their
pathway plans, including the time spent by YPAs in helping them to think and
plan ahead, but some plans are not sufficiently specific or measurable. In the
case of the weaker pathway plans, goals are defined in very general terms
and do not make it clear what needs to happen or when. The local authority
has recognised this and is taking action to address it. (Recommendation)


Every time that they meet young people, YPAs ask young people about their
health, and actively encourage and support them to make and keep medical
appointments. Young people have easy access to the nurse for children looked
after, who attends the weekly Friday drop-ins. Health passports, developed in
collaboration with members of the Children in Care Council and the care
leavers forum, ensure that care leavers have full access to their health
histories.


Care leavers are well supported to develop the skills that they need to live
independently. In addition to the support provided by their YPAs, care leavers
talk positively about the independent living course, which helps them with
practical tasks such as cooking and budgeting while also giving them an
opportunity to mix socially with other young people who are in a similar
position to themselves.


As the voice of care leavers, the care leavers forum has played a significant
role in shaping the way in which the care leavers service has developed. Care
leavers told inspectors that they feel valued and listened to. Evidence of their
influence includes the fact that care leavers who are under 25 years of age
are exempt from council tax, are given free membership of The Way Youth
Zone, which includes gym, dance and leisure facilities, and that if they go to
university or have to move, the local authority will pay for their furniture to be
put in storage.


Too many young people are not in education, employment or training (NEET)
but there is evidence of real improvement. The education, employment and
training coordinator is in regular contact with all young people who are NEET
and, as a result of concerted action taken over the past 12 months, the
proportion of care leavers who are NEET has fallen from 47% to 20%. Once a
month, managers routinely review the position of every care leaver who is
NEET to ensure that everything that can be done is being done to engage
them in worthwhile activities.


Currently 21 young people are studying for a degree at university. The
support available to these young people is good. This includes additional
grants, moving-in starter kits and payment of graduation costs, as well as
extra support at the local university, if needed. Good links and close working
relationships with further education establishments ensure that information is
shared appropriately, and young people are well supported by the college and
the local authority.



Care leavers have good access to useful and relevant information via
Facebook and/or the dedicated care leavers website. An information pack,
which includes a helpful series of pull-outs and leaflets and is given to them
by their YPAs, ensures that care leavers are well aware of their rights and
entitlements. As part of the pathway planning process, YPAs also make sure
that they remind young people about key information as and when it becomes
relevant.


All care leavers are living in suitable accommodation. The local authority has
allocated 33 flats specifically for 16- to 18-year-olds, with a member of staff
available on call at all times to support the young people. YPAs work with care
leavers to help them to choose where they live and who they live with.
Together, they agree plans to make sure that young people feel and are safe,
and that they are able to look after themselves. Every care leaver is entitled to
spend up to two weeks in an assessment flat in order to demonstrate to
themselves and others that they are ready for their own tenancy. The vast
majority (82%) of young people who have been prepared for independence in
this way are now living successfully in unsupported accommodation


Twenty-one young people are living with their former foster carers as part of
a staying put arrangement. All of these arrangements have been assessed
and agreed as being right for the young people, and their individual needs
and circumstances.


An annual awards ceremony, organised by the local authority in partnership
with the Children in Care Council and the care leavers forum, celebrates the
achievements of children looked after and care leavers. At last years dazzling
event at a local hotel, over 200 certificates were awarded in categories such
as gaining independence and overcoming obstacles/challenges, as well as for
educational achievements, This years Christmas party was designed to help
care leavers, some of whom had this as part of their pathway plan, to
socialise and make new friends. Care leavers were particularly impressed by
the fact that senior managers, leaders and elected members stayed for the
whole event.


Care leavers are able to articulate clearly how, with the support of their YPAs,
their confidence has increased. They particularly appreciate that that support
will continue to be available until their 25th birthdays.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
Senior managers, leaders and elected members, who know themselves and their
communities well, are driving improvements in services for children and families.
Business and service plans are appropriately focused on key priority areas as part
of a one council approach to achieving financial stability, while at the same time
delivering better outcomes for children and young people.
The multi-agency safeguarding hub provides a robust and effective response to
children and families at the first point of contact. Early intervention services have
been redesigned to extend their reach and promote partnership working. The
number of children looked after has been significantly reduced without
compromising childrens safety. Edge-of-care services are strong.
Clear governance arrangements, rigorous scrutiny, and a range of effective
strategic and operational partnerships mean that services are responsive to the
diverse needs of children and families. Robust strategic and operational
arrangements ensure that children who go missing or are at risk of being sexually
exploited are identified, and that timely action is taken to safeguard and protect
them.
Effective engagement with children and young people means that they are able to
influence the development and delivery of services. The local authority is a good
and effective corporate parent. Children looked after and care leavers told
inspectors that they feel valued and are listened to.
Senior managers, leaders and elected members make good and effective use of
performance management information to monitor and manage performance but
the balanced scorecard, which is in the process of being refreshed, does not yet
provide a direct line of sight on all aspects of frontline activity. While the local
authority has made good use of audits, including externally commissioned audits,
to raise practice standards, the quality assurance framework is not yet fully
embedded. Currently, team managers are responsible for auditing their own teams
work, and the quality of audits undertaken by them is variable.
While most social workers receive regular supervision, the quality of critical
challenge provided by frontline managers is not consistently robust. Recognising
this, the local authority is in the process of rolling out a new competency-based
supervision and appraisal framework.
Determined to build resilience and achieve strength in depth, senior managers
have succeeded in reducing staff turnover, while at the same time introducing
clear career pathways which make Wolverhampton a more attractive place to
work. Learning and development is given a suitably high priority.


Inspection findings

The local authority is ambitious, realistic and determined to achieve financial
stability and improve outcomes for children and young people. Corporate
leadership is strong. Senior managers and leaders are in touch with, and have
a generally good understanding of, what is happening at the frontline. Robust
strategic and operational arrangements to identify, manage and reduce risks
of child sexual exploitation are in place, and the local authority and its
partners have significantly strengthened their response to children who go
missing from home, school or care.


An experienced, knowledgeable and highly committed group of senior
managers has led childrens services well through a period of significant
change. Senior managers, leaders and elected members have focused on key
priority areas, including safely reducing the numbers of children looked after,
establishing an effective multi-agency safeguarding hub and redesigning early
intervention services to extend their reach and impact. The childrens
transformation board is effective in driving continuous improvement. Good
progress is being made in delivering better outcomes for children in most
areas.


Governance arrangements are robust. Good communication between senior
managers, leaders and elected members, as part of a one council approach,
ensures that there is an appropriate level of scrutiny and effective challenge.
The director of childrens services, the managing director, the lead member
and the Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) chair maintain regular
formal and informal contact, and there is evidence of healthy and
appropriately rigorous debate. Elected members have consistently
demonstrated a willingness to invest in services for children and young
people.


Partnership arrangements are strong. A joint-working protocol, which provides
a clear overview of the role and function of the different strategic boards and
their links to operational groups, helps to ensure that the various strategic
initiatives are clearly aligned, avoiding duplication or overlap. The
development of the MASH, and the co-location of health visitors and midwives
with social workers and early intervention workers, soon to be joined by police
officers, in eight locality-based strengthening families hubs, demonstrate the
maturity of these relationships.


The Health and Wellbeing Board is appropriately focused on children and
families. As part of its strategic commitment to reduce childhood obesity, an
initiative involving public health practitioners working alongside childrens
social care staff has successfully targeted obese children who were the subject
of child protection or child in need plans. Most of the children involved
successfully managed to maintain their weight loss or lose more weight.



While the joint strategic needs assessment is being comprehensively
refreshed, there is clear evidence that analysis of local needs is being used
effectively to inform service developments. Effective commissioning
arrangements mean that the local authority has in place a sufficient range of
high-quality placements to meet the needs of children looked after. Domestic
abuse services are currently under review.


The children and young people scrutiny panel, which enjoys good cross-party
support and includes three members of the youth council, provides effective
oversight of childrens issues. In 2016, the panel identified child sexual
exploitation as one of its key priorities, ensuring that the issue has been given
a suitably high profile across all council departments. More recently, the panel
has challenged, among other things, the use of pupil premium plus for
children looked after.


The local authority is ambitious for children looked after and takes its
corporate parenting responsibilities very seriously. Chaired by the lead
member and with access to good quality performance management
information, the corporate parenting board is influential in improving
outcomes for children looked after and care leavers. Evidence of this is clearly
seen in the quality of accommodation and support for care leavers, as well as
the work of the virtual school, which has resulted in children looked after
doing as well or better at school than their peers. The board has also been
directly involved in initiatives to provide free leisure passes for children looked
after and offer council tax exemptions for care leavers. All councillors are
required to undertake corporate parenting and safeguarding training.


A strong focus on participation means that care leavers and children looked
after feel involved and listened to. The lead member, who also chairs the
childrens trust board, is in regular contact with the Children in Care Council
and the care leavers forum. Reports to the corporate parenting board are first
scrutinised then approved by the CiCC, before being presented to the board. A
video on what it is like to be a child in care, produced by young people, forms
part of the e-learning which all council employees are required to complete.
Childrens views have a clear influence on the development and delivery of
services, as evidenced, for example, by their involvement in staff recruitment
panels.


The local authority is making good use of a wealth of performance
management information to monitor performance, track progress, identify
service pressures and drive improvement. However, the balanced scorecard is
about to be refreshed. Currently, the level of commentary and analysis
provided is limited and, in the case of some key indicators, there is little in the
way of comparative data against which to measure Wolverhamptons
progress. Additionally, although decisive action is being taken to double the
size of the multi-agency enquiry team so that children in need, including
children with disabilities, do not have to wait longer than is necessary for their
needs to be fully assessed, senior managers, leaders and elected members do


not receive regular reports on the number of children whose cases are being
managed on duty or held by team managers before being allocated a named
social worker. (Recommendation)

Keen to learn and open to challenge, the local authority has made good use of
audit activity, including peer reviews and an externally commissioned audit of
development and implementation of a neglect tool and the delivery of further
training on domestic abuse are two examples of how audits and/or learning
from serious case reviews have informed practice. Independent reviewing
officers also produce quarterly reports so that issues affecting frontline
practice can be responded to quickly. However, the quality assurance
framework, which has recently been refreshed, is not yet fully embedded. A
lack of consistency in the way in which frontline managers apply the new case
file audit tool, which was introduced in September 2016, suggests that there
is not yet a universally shared understanding of what good looks like.
(Recommendation)


Complaints from children and families are taken seriously, and there are
robust systems in place for logging, monitoring, analysing and learning from
them. Heads of service receive weekly reports on the progress of complaints.
The outcome of complaints is routinely shared with staff and teams through
briefing meetings and training. Young people who wish to make a complaint
are offered the services of an advocate to support them. However, the takeup of advocacy support by children involved in the child protection process is
low. The local authority has recognised this and has plans to address it.


The level of critical challenge provided by frontline managers is not
consistently robust. Some are better than others at providing clear case
direction, setting specific and measurable targets, recording the rationale for
their decisions and making sure that the action agreed has been taken. On
occasion, this leads to drift or delay. Senior managers are clearly aware of
these issues and are in the process of taking action to address them, for
example by rolling out a preferred social work model and introducing a
competency-based supervision and appraisal framework. (Recommendation)


Senior managers have acted decisively to improve the quality and timeliness
of court-related work to ensure that children who are waiting for critical
decisions to be made are not left to wait unnecessarily. The local authority has
established a very positive working relationship with the Children and Family
Court Advisory and Support Service and the local judiciary, both of which
comment favourably on the progress that has been, and is being, made.


Senior managers are rightly proud of their achievements in reducing staff
turnover and increasing the stability of the workforce. Good links with local
universities, increased opportunities for student social work placements, and a
popular assessed and supported year in employment (ASYE) programme are
all having an impact. Twenty-two of the 26 social workers who completed


their ASYE in 2014 are still in the employment of the local authority. Staff
turnover has fallen from 16.7% to 15% in the past six months and, if all of
the candidates who are about to be offered posts accept, then the proportion
of agency staff will be down to 4.8%. A more settled and stable workforce
makes it possible for children and families to develop meaningful relationships
with their social workers.

With a robust training and workforce development strategy, the joint adult
and childrens social work development board and the children and young
peoples workforce development group ensure that social workers have access
to a good range of high-quality training. This includes bespoke training
provided by the child and family foundation, designed to help social workers
to develop and enhance their skills in assessment, analysis and care planning.
The creation of six advanced practitioner posts also reflects the local
authoritys commitment to building resilience and succession planning as part
of a conscious grow your own strategy.


Most social workers receive regular supervision, but the quality of that
supervision is variable. Caseload size also varies. Caseloads are greatest in the
safeguarding teams. Work is ongoing to ensure that average caseloads can be
accurately calculated.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board requires improvement

Executive summary
The board is well chaired and well led. Governance arrangements are robust. As
well as strengthening the engagement of schools and health partners, the chair
has successfully promoted a more joined-up approach across children and adult
services.
Partner agencies are well represented on the board at a suitably senior level.
Attendance at board meetings is good and a well-developed sub-group structure
ensures that the board is able to deliver on its work programme, especially now
that additional funding has been provided to increase the boards capacity to get
things done.
The boards website, which is attractive and easy to navigate, provides a wealth of
useful information, including the outcome of the two serious case reviews which
have been completed in the past 12 months. Multi-agency procedures, which are
regularly updated, are also available on the website. However, the boards annual
report does not provide a comprehensive picture of all key areas of safeguarding
practice.
The serious case review sub-group and the child death overview panel are well
developed and effective. Learning from serious case and child death reviews are
systematically shared with professionals and partner agencies. Robust strategic
and operational arrangements are in place to safeguard and protect children and
young people who go missing and/or are at risk of sexual exploitation. Links with
local faith groups have been strengthened. Through the activities of the B-safe
group, children and young people are able to shape and influence the work and
thinking of the board.
However, while the board is meeting its statutory responsibilities, it does not yet
have all of the performance management information that it needs to be able to
challenge and hold to account partner agencies effectively. Additionally, in the
absence of a rolling programme of single and multi-agency audits, the board is not
able fully to assure itself about the quality and effectiveness of frontline
safeguarding practice. Without a central risk register, the board does not have a
sufficiently clear or coherent overview of those risks which have the potential to
have a negative impact on the ability of partner agencies to safeguard and protect
children.
While the board works collaboratively to deliver an extensive range of training
courses, the absence of a formal training strategy means that it is not in a position
to evaluate the impact of training on frontline practice.


Recommendations

Further develop the boards risk register to include those risks which have the
potential to have a negative impact on the ability of partner agencies to
safeguard and protect children and young people effectively (para. 119).


Ensure that the Local Safeguarding Children Board has the right level of
performance management information with which to challenge and hold to
account partner agencies on the effectiveness of their safeguarding
responsibilities (para. 120).


Develop a coherent rolling programme of single and multi-agency audits with
which to quality-assure the work of partner agencies in safeguarding and
protecting children, and ensure that the results of Section 11 audits are
moderated effectively (paras. 121 and 122).


Develop a robust training strategy which incorporates a system with which to
evaluate the impact of training on frontline practice (para. 129).


Further strengthen the annual report to ensure that it provides a clear picture
of the effectiveness of partner agencies across all key safeguarding services,
including the independent reviewing officer service, the work of the
designated officer in managing allegations against professional and private
fostering arrangements, as well as learning from serious case reviews and
child deaths (para. 130).

Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

With a well-developed sub-group structure and appropriate reporting
arrangements, governance arrangements are robust. The chair of the Local
Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB) is in regular contact with the director of
childrens services and meets once a quarter with the managing director and
lead member. A joint working protocol clearly defines the relationships
between the different strategic boards, including the LSCB. The chair, who
routinely attends the Health and Wellbeing Board, ensures that safeguarding
issues are given a sufficiently high profile.


Experienced and assured, the LSCB chair brings rigour to the work of the
board while at the same time providing effective challenge. He has used his
position as chair of both the Adult and Children Safeguarding Boards
effectively to promote a more joined-up approach across children and adult
services, particularly at key transition points. Two of the sub-groups  the
learning and development, and the communication and engagement  are
shared with the Adult Safeguarding Board. Increased engagement by partner
agencies, for example, has contributed to improvements in the contribution of
general practitioners to child protection conferences, and both the completion
and quality of return home interviews.



Partner agencies are well represented at an appropriately senior level on the
LSCB. Attendance is good, and there is a shared commitment to delivering
high-quality safeguarding services. Engagement with schools and colleges,
including the independent sector, is particularly strong, as evidenced by an
active and well-established headteachers sub-group. The lay member, who is
a church minister, brings a fresh and unique perspective to the board.
Effective challenge across the partnership, for example in relation to the high
number of children who previously were being taken into police protection,
has resulted in better outcomes for children.


As well as maintaining a risk register in relation to the delivery of its own work
programme, the board regularly discusses the impact of potential risks on
partner agencies ability to safeguard and protect children and young people.
However, in the absence of a central, shared risk register, the board does not
have a sufficiently clear and coherent overview of those risks, which makes it
difficult for the board to ensure that they are addressed in a timely manner.
(Recommendation)


The LSCBs multi-agency performance scorecard is not yet sufficiently well
developed to enable the board to scrutinise rigorously the experience and
progress of children and young people, or the work of partner agencies in
safeguarding and protecting them. For example, the boards oversight of the
effectiveness and impact of early help services, the quality of decision-making
in the multi-agency hub and the provision of services to children in need and
children looked after is not sufficiently robust. The board has recognised this
and its performance scorecard is currently under review. (Recommendation)


Action has been taken to strengthen the boards capacity to quality assure the
practice and performance of partner agencies. In 2016, the board carried out
three multi-agency audits, on parental mental health, on sexual exploitation
and on the use of the pre-birth checklist, and subsequently disseminated
briefings on the learning from them across the partnership. However, in the
absence of a coherent, rolling programme of single- and multi-agency audits,
the board is not fully fulfilling its quality assurance function.
(Recommendation)


While the headteachers sub-group assures safeguarding practice effectively in
schools and educational establishments, section 11 audits currently rely on
self-reporting by agencies. To date, supporting evidence has not been
scrutinised or cross-referenced against findings from multi-agency audits or
other performance information. However, the newly-formed quality assurance
sub-group plans to address this. (Recommendation)


A refreshed learning and improvement framework ensures that decisions to
initiate a serious case review or, in those cases which do not meet the criteria
for an SCR, a lessons learned review, are appropriate. The SCR sub-group
provides effective oversight, ensuring that the lessons learned from SCRs are
acted on and result in improvements in service delivery and safeguarding


practice. Having completed and published two SCRs in the past 12 months,
the board has been proactive in organising a number of events to disseminate
the learning from them across the partnership.

Robust arrangements are in place to review and learn from child deaths. The
Child Death Overview Panel (CDOP), shared with Walsall, is effective. Its
annual report is appropriately detailed, reflects the work undertaken by CDOP
to reduce infant mortality and identifies key priorities as part of its ongoing
work programme. A multi-agency, multi-faceted campaign, led by public
health, has been successful in reducing infant mortality. Appropriate action is
being taken by CDOP to improve the quality and timeliness of the
documentation produced by partner agencies which, in the past, led to a
backlog of cases waiting to be reviewed. Learning from child deaths is
routinely shared with partners, as appropriate.


Robust strategic and operational arrangements are in place to identify and
safeguard children and young people who go missing and/or are at risk of
sexual exploitation. The sexual exploitation, missing and trafficking (SEMT)
sub-group oversees effectively the work of the child missing operational
group, which focuses on perpetrators and potential hotspots, and SEMT has
recently drafted a comprehensive problem profile. Good use is made of the
child sexual exploitation screening tool. Training for taxi drivers and hoteliers
has increased awareness of child sexual exploitation. However, although SEMT
monitors performance and reports to the board at periodic intervals, the
boards performance scorecard does not include any data on child sexual
exploitation with which to scrutinise the contribution of partner agencies to
keeping children safe.


The board has developed a strong local profile by running a number of
successful campaigns to raise awareness of issues such as violence against
women and girls, radicalisation and sexual exploitation. The Wolverhampton
Safeguarding Children Board website is dynamic, easy to navigate and
includes up-to-date news and blogs from the chair. Multi-agency procedures,
which are regularly reviewed and updated, are clear and comprehensive. SCR
reports are also available on the website


Children and young people are influential in the work of the board. With good
links to the children in care and youth councils, members of the B-safe subgroup regularly meet with the LSCB chair. As well as organising a number of
initiatives to raise awareness of safeguarding issues which directly affect
young people, such as bullying, alcohol misuse and sexual exploitation, this
dynamic group of young people continues to shape the thinking of board
members.


The communication and engagement sub-group has taken a lead role in
developing closer links with local faith groups, working with them to develop
effective safeguarding policies and practices. Undertaken in response to the
findings of an SCR, this has enabled the board to extend its reach and


influence, at the same time increasing its understanding and assurance of
safeguarding practice across a range of different faith communities.

Working in close collaboration with neighbouring safeguarding boards, the
learning and development sub-group offers a comprehensive range of
safeguarding courses. Many of these courses are relevant to professionals
working with children or adults. This approach ensures that, irrespective of
their primary focus, professionals are able to recognise and respond to
safeguarding issues and concerns that have an impact on children and young
people. However, although the board has strengthened its capacity to design
and deliver training, it neither has a formal training strategy nor routinely
evaluates the impact of training on frontline practice. (Recommendation)


Although the boards annual report for 201516 includes easy-to-understand,
child-relevant data, highlights key achievements and identifies areas for
development, it does not provide a rigorous assessment or analysis of the
quality and effectiveness of frontline safeguarding and child protection
practice across partner agencies. Neither does it provide information about
learning from serious case and child death reviews, the management of
allegations against professionals, the independent reviewing officer service or
private fostering. (Recommendation)


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference adults make to the lives
of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people who it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the local safeguarding children board under its power to combine reports in
accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) from
Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector:

Nigel Parkes

Deputy lead inspector:

Anne Waterman

Team inspectors:

Nicola Bennett, Pauline Higham, Louise Hocking,
Neil Penswick, Emmy Tomsett, Tracey Zimmerman

Shadow inspectors:

N/A

Senior data analyst:

Neil Powling

Quality assurance manager:

Lynn Radley


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


