York City Council
Inspection of services for children in need of help and
protection, children looked after and care leavers
and
Review of the effectiveness of the Local Safeguarding Children
Board1
Inspection date: 14 November 2016  8 December 2016
Report published: 07 February 2017

Childrens services in York are good

Requires improvement

permanence

Good


Good


Good


Good

Ofsted produces this report under its power to combine reports in accordance with section 152 of
the Education and Inspections Act 2006. This report includes the report of the inspection of local
authority functions carried out under section 136 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006 and the
report of the review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board carried out under the Local
Safeguarding Children Boards (Review) Regulations 2013.


Executive summary
Overall, childrens services in York are good. The chief executive, director of
childrens services (DCS), senior leaders and elected members ensure that there are
robust governance arrangements and set clear priorities and aspirations to improve
outcomes for children in York. They share a well-articulated vision of continuous
improvement and progress for all children. A wholescale restructuring of childrens
social care was completed in September 2016.
The restructuring of childrens social care is supported by a new electronic recording
system introduced in March 2016 and further structural changes in September 2016.
This is beginning to evidence clear improvements in outcomes for most children
across the service. However, it is not complete, so the full impact cannot be seen for
all children, particularly those in need of help and protection. Services to children
who need help and protection require improvement. A recently developed system to
integrate multi-agency information into a childs single assessment has been
implemented. However, this is not yet improving the quality or timeliness of
childrens assessments or the resulting plans. Overall, assessments lack focus on all
risks within families and do not consider parents histories well enough. They do not
take enough account of the uniqueness of families, their culture or heritage. It is,
however, a particular strength that the local authority has prioritised capturing in
assessments the voice of the child.
There is clear evidence that reduced caseloads are giving social workers the
opportunity to undertake direct work with children. Workforce planning is effective.
Staff are supported through a wide range of training opportunities. Senior managers
are visible and approachable. Staff with whom inspectors spoke said that they feel
valued, safe and supported. This has resulted in high retention rates and a reduction
in the use of agency workers. While staff receive regular supervision, their records
do not show how they are helped to reflect on practice or supported to develop.
Some frontline managers across the service do not always identify when delay is
occurring in progressing childrens assessments. While senior managers receive
regular performance information on frontline operational practice through a revised
comprehensive quality assurance framework, this is not yet providing managers with
a clear understanding of the experience and progress of all children.
There are highly effective links to the YorOK Childrens Trust Board, the Health and
Wellbeing Board (HWB) and the City of York Safeguarding Children Board (CYSCB).
The voice of children is integral to strategic and operational activity. The promotion
of childrens views and ways in which these influence service developments are
highly effective and embedded in the foundations of the local authority and
partnership culture. There is a clearly articulated approach to the application of
thresholds for access to childrens social care, which is understood and applied
across the partnership. A wide range of effective services are in place to help
children and their families to access help and protection when they need it. A
comprehensive, multi-agency strategy is in place for responding to domestic abuse.
There has been an innovative parent-led development to accessing short breaks for


children who have a disability and about whom there is no safeguarding concern.
This has led to more timely and positive outcomes for children and their families. A
dedicated children in need team coordinates services for children and their families,
providing lower-level and intensive, time-limited interventions and effective edge-ofcare support. This has safely reduced the number of children who become looked
after or subject to a child protection plan and has sustained the lower numbers over
several years. When children return home from care, outcome-focused assessments,
planning and support ensure that the decisions are safe and in the childs best
interests.
There are highly effective mechanisms in place to respond to and safeguard children
who go missing from home or education, or who are at risk of being sexually
exploited. Outstanding work by the council and its partners, driven by the CYSCB,
has developed effective referral and assessment processes when children are at risk
or have been victims of child sexual exploitation. Extensive training and awareness
raising through the councils Its not OK campaign have delivered many positive
outcomes, increasing the awareness of risk indicators and raising confidence among
professionals and the general public in responding to those risks. Most importantly, it
has encouraged children to speak out about their worries and concerns.
The services for children looked after are good. The majority of children looked after
are cared for by local foster carers. The number of children placed out of the city
continues to fall. Independent reviewing officers (IROs) are an emerging strength.
Evidence of their scrutiny and challenge can be seen on the majority of childrens
records and plans, although the impact of their challenge is not well evidenced. Plans
for children who are looked after to achieve permanency are progressed in a timely
way. A full range of permanent placement options are considered at the earliest
possible stage. York has a good success rate in securing foster to adopt and staying
put arrangements, and provides children with good foster homes through the
selective recruitment of capable, caring and resilient foster carers, although foster
carers do not receive good enough support out of hours. Legal permanence is
secured promptly, and the quality of care applications before the court is good.
However, letters before proceedings do not make clear enough to parents what they
need to do to achieve positive and sustained change, or when care proceedings will
be issued if change is not achieved. When adoption is the agreed plan for the child,
there is a relentless focus on securing the right placement at the right time. Children
are well prepared and supported, and adopters are positive about their experiences,
including their post-adoption support.
The local authority has high aspirations for their care leavers. A high percentage are
in employment and training. There is a range of suitable and safe accommodation
options for care leavers. York has a strong track record in supporting care leavers to
remain with their foster carers after their 18th birthdays. Good pathway planning
supports preparation for independence, when it is safe and appropriate to do so.


Contents
Executive summary


The local authority


Information about this local authority area


Recommendations


Summary for children and young people


The experiences and progress of children who need help and
protection


The experiences and progress of children looked after and achieving
permanence
Leadership, management and governance

The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)


Executive summary


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board


Information about this inspection




The local authority
Information about this local authority area2
Previous Ofsted inspections
 The local authority operates one childrens home, which was judged to be good in
its most recent Ofsted inspection.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys safeguarding arrangements/
arrangements for the protection of children was in May 2012. The local authority
was judged to be good.
 The last inspection of the local authoritys services for children looked after was in
May 2012. The local authority was judged to be good.
Local leadership
 The DCS has been in post since March 2014.
 The DCS is also responsible for community services and skills.
 The chair of the CYSCB has been in post since January 2014.

The local authority was given the opportunity to review this section of the report and has updated it
with local unvalidated data where this was available.


Children living in this area
 Approximately 36,699 children and young people under the age of 18 years live
in York. This is 18% of the total population in the area.
 Approximately 11% of the local authoritys children are living in poverty.
 The proportion of children entitled to free school meals:
 in primary schools is 9% (the national average is 17%)
 in secondary schools is 8% (the national average is 15%).
 Children and young people from minority ethnic groups account for 8% of all
children living in the area, compared with 22% in the country as a whole.
 The largest minority ethnic groups of children and young people in the area are
Asian/Asian British (3%) and Mixed ethnicity (3%).
 The proportion of children and young people with English as an additional
language:
 in primary schools is 7.6% (the national average is 20.1%)
 in secondary schools is 4.7% (the national average is 15.7%).
Child protection in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 1,095 children had been identified through assessment as
being formally in need of a specialist childrens service. This is an increase from
 At 30 September 2016, 143 children and young people were the subject of a child
protection plan. This is an increase from 135 at 31 March 2016.
 At 30 September 2016, two children lived in a privately arranged fostering
placement. This is a decrease from four at 31 March 2016.
 Since the last inspection, two serious incident notifications have been submitted
to Ofsted and one serious case review has been completed.
Children looked after in this area
 At 30 September 2016, 190 children were being looked after by the local
authority (a rate of 52 per 10,000 children). This is the same as 190 as at 31
March 2016 (a rate of 52 per 10,000 children). Of this number:
the authority area
 one lives in a residential special school out of the authority area
families
 nine, of whom two (22%) live out of the authority area, live with parents


 two children have been unaccompanied asylum-seeking children in the
past 12 months.
 In the past 12 months:
 there have been three adoptions
 seven children became subject of special guardianship orders
returned to be looked after
 seven young people ceased to be looked after and moved onto
independent living
 no young people who ceased to be looked after are living in houses in
multiple occupation.
The local authority operates a small number of theoretical models to
support social work practice.


Recommendations

Improve the timeliness and quality of assessments for all children to ensure
that their needs are fully understood. In particular, ensure that robust risk
assessments, which explore whole family histories are undertaken to inform
plans fully, and that the additional vulnerabilities of children who have a
disability are recognised and understood.


Ensure that assessments consider the impact of a childs uniqueness arising
from their family culture and ethnicity.


Ensure that plans are updated when childrens needs change or when
significant events occur in their lives.


Ensure that children and their carers have access to effective out-of-hours
support and that robust agency checks take place and are clearly recorded to
inform decisions and actions to be taken.


Ensure that initial and review health assessments are completed in a timely
manner for children who are looked after.


Improve the quality of letters before care proceedings, ensuring that they
stipulate clearly what is expected of parents and professionals, contain
timescales for change to be achieved and are clear about what action will be
taken if childrens circumstances do not improve.


Ensure that child protection chairs and IROs monitor actions between
childrens reviews and demonstrate evidence of the impact of any challenge
that they make when progress is not being made against the childs plan.


Ensure that care leavers are supported to understand their health histories
and that they and professionals are clear about the pathways to access
support for their emotional and mental health needs.


Improve the quality of frontline management oversight and direction across all
teams, and ensure that social workers receive good-quality supervision that
supports and challenges practice and promotes professional development.


Ensure that managers have access to accurate audit tools and performance
data that lead to specific areas for practice improvements.


Summary for children and young people
 When children, young people and their families begin to have problems, they
have access to a wide range of help and good-quality services. When children
need a higher level of support, sometimes it takes too long for assessments to be
completed. Childrens needs are not always well understood, and this means that
plans to help them are not always focused on the right things and that it can take
too long to get the support for some children when they need it.


Senior managers, councillors and social workers work very hard to make sure that
children and young people take part in the decisions affecting their lives and
about the support that they get. They come to know children and young people
very well, listen carefully to what they have to say and, if they need to, do things
differently to make services better.

 The Children in Care Council (CiCC)s Show me that I matter group works
extremely hard to influence how children in care and care leavers are understood
and supported and have the best possible chances to be safe, healthy and happy,
and to achieve. Children and young people talk to senior managers and
councillors about how the council and services are best organised to support
families. The council also provides training for adults to help them better to
understand childrens lives, and it won a national award for helping children in
care to see that they can have happy and fulfilling lives.
 Social workers, teachers, doctors, nurses, health visitors and the police act
together quickly to help to keep children and young people safe. Senior managers
make sure that everyone understands the problems faced by children and young
people, and that different agencies work together well to protect children and
young people. The Its not OK campaign has helped children, young people and
adults to understand more about the risk of sexual abuse and exploitation, and
what to do if they are worried about it.
 When children and young people are unable to live with their parents, social
workers find them a good home with caring adults. Social workers always try to
keep brothers and sisters together, and enable children to see people who are
important to them. If it is safe for children to return home, social workers make
sure that families continue to get the help that they need for as long as
necessary. Social workers make every effort to find the best possible adoptive
families for children at the right time. When children and young people cannot
return home to live with their parents, social workers and support workers help
them to understand the reasons why this needed to happen, and to have
information about their background.
 Young people have good help and support when it is time for them to leave care.
Their health needs are well met, but they do not always understand how to get
help with their emotional needs. They are helped to find a safe place to live that
is right for them, and some continue to live with foster carers after their 18th
birthdays. They have the practical support that they need to live independently,
to stay in education or to find a job.


The experiences and progress of
children who need help and
protection

Requires improvement

Summary
When children are referred to childrens social care, their immediate safety needs
are identified and responded to effectively. Professionals and families have easy
access to social workers to discuss safeguarding concerns, receive advice and
guidance and be signposted to early help support. Thresholds are understood and
applied across the partnership. When children are in need of protection, multiagency strategy discussions take place promptly and are well attended by agency
partners.
A recently developed system to integrate multi-agency information into a childs
single assessment has been implemented. However, this is not yet improving the
quality or timeliness of all childrens assessments or the resulting plans. Overall,
assessments lack focus on all risks within families and do not consider parents
histories well enough. As a result, some childrens plans are not focused on all
risks. The needs of children who have a disability and require a statutory service
are not always well understood. Contingency plans are largely absent from
childrens records. Assessments do not take enough account of the uniqueness of
families, their culture or heritage. Although management oversight is in evidence,
it does not always identify when delay is occurring or consistently challenge the
quality of social work practice. Social workers know children well, and senior
managers are aware of individual children for whom there is a high degree of risk
or complexity.
A collaborative multi-agency approach identifies the needs of individual children
who may benefit from early help. Support is available from a wide range of
effective services across the city. The number of family early help assessments
(FEHAs) are increasing, although some lack a robust analysis and are unclear
about the actions to be taken and services to be provided. Innovative parent-led
developments to access short breaks for children who have a disability have led to
more timely and positive outcomes for children. There is a proactive multi-agency
response to children who are exposed to domestic abuse, parental substance
misuse and parental mental health issues.
Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation and/or go missing from home
receive an effective, well-coordinated range of services to address their assessed
needs. When children aged 16 to 17 present as homeless, they receive a sensitive
response to provide them with support and, if appropriate, accommodation.
A neighbouring authority provides out-of-hours support. While this service
responds to immediate risks, the rationale for decisions is poorly recorded, and
decisions are not underpinned by robust agency checks.


Inspection findings

A mature multi-agency partnership works effectively to identify children who
may benefit from early help services. While early help services are well
coordinated, senior leaders have recognised the need to improve the delivery
of early help interventions in order to improve the way that families are
supported. Firm plans are in place to establish three multi-agency local area
teams from January 2017.


Currently, the main route to access early help is through the childrens advice
team (CAT). Professionals and the general public receive good-quality
information, advice and guidance from the CAT advisers, who use a
comprehensive directory of local services to ensure that children are directed
to the appropriate provision. The CAT advisers also coordinate the allocation
of FEHAs and all arrangements when childrens needs step down to early help,
or step up to statutory services.


Although the numbers of FEHAs are slowly increasing, inspectors found
inconsistent practice in their quality. Although multi-agency information is
included, there are weaknesses in the analysis, which limit the identification of
childrens holistic needs. The voice of the child comes through strongly in
statutory assessments, but this was less evident at the early help stage. In
addition, it was difficult to see how managers across the partnership measure
the impact of early help, as currently there is no evaluation of childrens
progress or the quality of FEHAs undertaken. (Recommendation)


The referral and assessment service restructured in September 2014 provides
an effective first point for contact with childrens social care. Professionals and
families have easy access to social workers to discuss safeguarding concerns,
receive advice and guidance and be signposted to early help support.
Thresholds for access to childrens social care are well understood and applied
across the partnership. The co-location of agency partners means that multiagency information is readily available and is used effectively to inform
decision-making. Parental consent is understood and applied, as appropriate.


Referrals out of hours are responded to through an arrangement with a
neighbouring authority. Inspectors identified in all five childrens cases
sampled that the rationale for decisions is poorly recorded. In two of the five
childrens cases reviewed by inspectors, agency checks were not completed,
which meant that decisions to take no further action were based on
insufficient information. In addition, foster carers reported to inspectors that
they have no confidence in the service, and choose to seek support from
within the fostering network. (Recommendation)


When children are in need of protection, multi-agency strategy discussions
take place promptly and are well attended by agency partners. Enquiries and


investigations are undertaken by experienced social workers, although the
records of discussions to inform safety plans often lack detail and do not
always contain the timescales within which actions are to be achieved.

Initial child protection conferences are held within statutory timescales. All
initial and review child protection conferences are well chaired and attended
by a wide range of agencies. This results in well-informed multi-agency
decision-making. While some progress is being made in supporting children to
attend their conferences when appropriate, the numbers doing so are very
low. An action plan is in place to address this, and children have access to
effective and advocacy support.


A dedicated children in need team coordinates services to children and their
families. This service provides lower-level, intensive time-limited interventions
and effective edge-of-care support. Positive impact can be seen in the safe
reduction in the number of children who are re-referred to childrens social
care. A strong emphasis is placed on ensuring that parents have
demonstrated sustained change before childrens cases are closed or stepped
down to early help, and underpins this positive performance. This means that
children are receiving the right help for as long as it is needed.


Despite this positive performance, at the time of the inspection, there were
delays in the completion of single assessments for 49% of children. The local
authoritys data showed that 140 children had waited between for 51 and 100
days for their assessment to be completed and signed off by a manager. The
local authoritys self-assessment recognised that some children were waiting
too long for services to be provided while single assessments were ongoing.
Senior managers explained to inspectors that some children had experienced
delays in their assessments being completed in recent months, in part due to
the restructuring of childrens services and a difficulty in recruiting to social
work vacancies during this time. They had also identified weaknesses in the
performance of some managers at different levels of the organisation, which
were impacting adversely on the oversight and grip of childrens assessments
and plans. A successful recruitment campaign and the restructuring of
childrens services has begun to positively address these issues. In September
intention to provide support during childrens assessments. Senior managers
recognise that this is a short-term solution for any child who may require this
support.


In order to improve assessment quality, together with the CYSCB, the local
authority has recently developed a system to integrate multi-agency
information into a childs single assessment and introduced a graded care
profile within single assessments in order to identify neglect better. Inspectors
have seen very recent evidence of social workers beginning to consider
neglect not as a static, single event but as a cumulative process that occurs
over time. However, overall assessments lack focus on all risks within families


and do not consider parents histories well enough. In nine of 10 childrens
cases tracked during the inspection, overall the assessment quality was poor.
Chronologies are not used to help social workers to make sense of the life
events which have been important to a child and their family or to assist with
decision-making. Although multi-agency information is contained in most
assessments, the analysis of risk and need is not well developed. The impact
of culture and diversity is not recognised sufficiently. The needs of brothers
and sisters are not considered separately, and only three of 10 childrens
assessments tracked by inspectors had evidence of robust management
oversight. When this was in evidence, it was poorly recorded.
(Recommendation)

It is a particular strength that the local authority has prioritised capturing in
assessments the voice of the child. There is clear evidence that reduced
caseloads and the recent restructuring of childrens services are giving social
workers an opportunity to undertake direct work with children. Social workers
know children well, and senior managers are aware of individual children for
whom there is a high degree of risk or complexity. It was clear to inspectors
that more direct work is undertaken with children than is evidenced in case
recording.


When appropriate, most assessments undertaken lead to a childs plan.
However, as the analysis of need in most assessments seen by inspectors was
weak, childrens holistic needs are not well understood. Childrens plans are
not always focused on the right things or the outcomes to be achieved.
Overall, plans do not stipulate what actions are to be undertaken or by whom.
Timescales for progress are not routinely recorded. Contingency plans are
rarely included, which makes it unclear to parents what is expected of them
and what action will be taken if change is not achieved and within what
timescale. This is mirrored in letters before proceedings for children subject to
child protection planning. It is also unclear whether parents and children have
agreed to or understood the plan. (Recommendation)


Childrens plans are regularly reviewed across the service. Statutory reviews
are held within timescales and are well attended by a range of agencies. Child
protection chairs challenge social workers and their managers when there are
gaps in childrens plans or when drift is occurring. However, childrens records
do not show whether this challenge has made any positive difference. When a
child in need plan is in place, this is reviewed by an IRO. This is a positive
development, which is beginning to improve the quality of the childs plan
after the first review.


Children who are at risk of sexual exploitation and those who go missing from
home and school receive an effective, well-coordinated range of services to
assess and respond to their needs. Children who go missing from home are
visited by a social worker and, if appropriate, a return home interview is
undertaken. All risk factors are considered, including the risk of sexual


exploitation. All outcomes are shared with a dedicated child exploitation and
missing coordinator. When children are identified to be at risk of exploitation
or this is suspected, robust wrap-around services intervene to assess risk and
safeguard the child. Bespoke multi-agency services are tailored to the needs
of individual children. All staff spoken to by inspectors had a high level of
awareness of child sexual exploitation, risk assessment processes and referral
pathways.

The coordinator oversees all missing children, including children looked after,
care leavers and those children looked after who are placed in York by other
local authorities. The coordinator has impressive and detailed knowledge of
individual children. Close links with education professionals enable the crossfertilisation of information and the identification of individual children, or
groups of children, at risk. Patterns and trends of risks and concerns are
gathered and analysed to inform childrens individual safety plans, wider risk
prevention and disruption activities, through strategic forums and close links
with the CYSCB.


The incidence of female genital mutilation in York is extremely low. However,
staff and partners spoken to during the inspection were very knowledgeable
about the issue. Similarly, the identification of the risk of radicalisation is
embedded within established local early help practice and arrangements.
Referral pathways are clear, and risks are well understood across the
partnership.


There is a well-considered response to special educational needs and
disability, delivered by a mature and well-managed partnership. There is clear
evidence that children, parents and their carers have influenced many service
developments. The impact can be seen, for example, in the refreshed shortbreaks offer. When there are no safeguarding concerns, parents can self-refer
through an online portal. A recent evaluation of this service shows that
outcomes are good, with the vast majority of children, parents and carers all
reporting the value of the service and how this has improved childrens
experiences, family life and parents relationships with their children.


Frontline managers in the health and disability service within childrens social
care are not robustly tracking the progress of allocated work or statutory
assessments and are not ensuring, through supervision, that there is sufficient
focus on risk and childrens changing needs. Inspectors found that when
referrals for short breaks are made through this service, there is evidence of
drift and delay in assessments being undertaken and the provision of services.
Similarly, in the small number of childrens cases sampled, when a child
protection response is needed, risk assessment is not robust. Senior managers
responded swiftly when inspectors referred one childs case back to the DCS
for urgent review, when the risks to a child who has disability had not been
fully identified or his holistic needs understood. In this childs case, inspectors
found limited evidence that safeguarding social workers are working in


partnership with the childrens health and disability service in order to
understand childrens holistic needs. (Recommendation)

Multi-agency partnerships are a particular strength in York, especially when
domestic abuse is a risk factor. Domestic abuse is the main reason why
children are referred to childrens social care. Consequently, domestic abuse is
a high priority across the partnership, driven by the CYSCB. Multi-agency risk
assessment conferences are well established and have a committed,
consistent membership, which supports effective safety planning to reduce
risk. A wide range of domestic abuse services are commissioned, including a
womens refuge and urban outreach service, which offers support for victims
to develop independence and can be provided for up to two years. Two
perpetrator programmes, Positive steps and Making safe, are always
available and there is no waiting list.


Some individual services to children are not timely, as both the independent
domestic abuse services (IDAS) and the respect and advocacy service
currently have a waiting list. Senior managers have responded effectively to
this shortfall, employing an early intervention worker to work within IDAS to
target and support cases of domestic abuse classed as standard risk, to
intervene at the earliest opportunity, to prevent escalation and to provide
direct support to children.


Effective multi-agency working is also evidenced in a recently piloted model
based on the family drug and alcohol court. It is too soon to see any
discernible impact. However, the early indications are positive, with evidence
seen of a childs case resulting in achieving permanency very quickly through
the making of a special guardianship order.


Arrangements for the assessment and accommodation of children aged 16 to
youth homeless scheme. Risk assessments are undertaken in a timely way,
and a good range of accommodation is available. Importantly, the youth
homeless scheme works to mediate for children returning home. Similar
pathways are available for homeless 16- to 17-year-olds who are pregnant or
have children, and they can be supported in specialised placements.


Children who are in private fostering arrangements do not benefit from
individual assessments separate from those of their carers. Neither does the
manager have oversight of all arrangements nor, until recently, has
performance information been accessible through data recording systems.
This has reduced effective management oversight of private fostering
arrangements. Senior managers have responded positively to findings during
the inspection and amended their procedures in respect of both issues, and
they plan to transfer responsibility for the completion of private fostering
assessments to a dedicated staff team.




Arrangements for managing allegations against staff, carers and volunteers
who work with children is commissioned from North Yorkshire County Council.
During this inspection, measures were taken to strengthen local oversight,
recording arrangements and increased capacity for information sharing
between the designated officer and local authority, as these were identified by
inspectors as weaknesses.

The experiences and progress of
children looked after and achieving
permanence

Good

Summary
When children become looked after, the decisions taken by social workers and
their managers are appropriate. Children are placed with their extended families
when it is safe to do so and is in their best interests. The local authority has
recently reviewed all childrens cases with a section 20 status to ensure that this is
the most appropriate legal option for those children. The majority of children
looked after are cared for by local foster carers who are well trained. When
children return home, they do so on the basis of clear risk assessments and with
good support.
Children do not always receive a reassessment of their needs when their
circumstances change or when a significant event occurs. Evidence of the scrutiny
and challenge of childrens plans by IROs can be seen on the majority of childrens
records, but these do not show how this challenge has made a difference.
Plans for children who are looked after to achieve permanency are progressed in a
timely way. Legal permanence is secured promptly, and the quality of care
applications before the court is very good. However, letters before proceedings do
not make it clear enough to parents what they need to do to achieve positive and
sustained change or the action that will take place if change is not achieved within
their childs timescale. When adoption is the agreed plan for the child, there is a
relentless focus on securing the right placement. Children are well prepared and
supported, and adopters are positive about their experiences, including postadoption support.
Children looked after are well supported at school. Some children of primary school
age do not make expected progress. Outcomes for children at key stage 4 are
above the national average. Personal education plans (PEPs) are mostly up to date
and of a good quality. Health assessments are not routinely completed in a timely
manner. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are not being used to inform
health assessments or to identify childrens emotional health needs.
Children looked after who go missing or are at risk of sexual exploitation receive
effective help and support to reduce risks and keep them safe. The Show me I
matter and the Show me I still matter groups are highly effective in representing
the views and interests of children looked after. Advocacy support for children is
strong. Most care leavers are placed in suitable accommodation. Care leavers are
prepared well to live independently when it is right for them. Pathway workers are
in touch with all young people, and most care leavers spoke positively about the
support that they receive.


Inspection findings

Concerted efforts are made to ensure that children remain with their families
when appropriate. An effective edge-of-care service provided by the children
in need teams has safely and consistently reduced the number of children
who become looked after over the past two years. Children are well supported
with a variety of service provisions designed to improve their circumstances
and prevent the need for them to become looked after. Inspectors saw no
cases in which children were looked after unnecessarily, and decisions were
made within a timescale that met their needs.


In a very small minority of cases, although childrens safety needs had been
addressed, there was a delay in childrens looked after status being
recognised when they are placed with connected persons. This was due to
social workers and managers not recognising that such arrangements meant
that these children were looked after.


When the plan is for children to return home, assessments are undertaken to
ensure that it is safe do so and that it is in their best interests. Children have
appropriate support plans to meet their needs, with risks clearly understood
and minimised. Plans to discharge care orders are not made until changes in
childrens circumstances have been sustained.


There are very effective strategic and operational relationships with the
Children and Family Court Advisory Service (Cafcass) and the family
proceedings courts. The local authority has a good reputation and produces
good written and oral evidence to support care applications. These are
accepted by the courts and childrens guardians, in most cases without the
need for additional or independent assessments. This results in legal
permanence being secured in a timely way. Care proceedings are completed
within an average period of 25 weeks. This is below the national threshold of
section 20 status to reassure itself that this is the most appropriate legal
option for those children. This has ensured that timely decisions are made
when children require legal permanence.


While childrens cases progress swiftly though the Public Law Outline (PLO), in
a small number of cases when letters before proceedings were issued these
were not routinely reviewed. The letters do not always not make it clear
enough to parents what they need to do to achieve positive and sustained
change, or what action will take place if the required change is not achieved
within their childs timescale. (Recommendation)


There is a strong sense that permanence must be sought and can be achieved
for all children. A full range of permanent placement options are considered at
the earliest possible stage. Viability assessments of potential extended family
carers are undertaken swiftly. Assessments are of a good quality. Family


group conferences to identify family carers and explore potential care
arrangements for children are routinely undertaken, which means that
children have the opportunity to be placed within their family network at the
earliest opportunity.

The local authority considers the permanent placement of children within the
wider family appropriately, and has encouraged and enabled the use of
special guardianship orders and child arrangement orders for family members
and foster carers. Financial and practical support plans are considered on an
individual basis, according to the childs and familys needs and circumstances.
Over the past year, five children have benefited from leaving care through
their foster families applying for special guardianship orders. At the time of
the inspection, 31 children looked after benefited from living with connected
carers.


Risks to children looked after who go missing from care and those at risk of
child sexual exploitation are promptly recognised and assessed. Strategy
meetings are held when risks are identified. Information sharing between
partner agencies is robust and well established, contributing to effective
planning that targets and reduces risks. Child sexual exploitation risk
assessments are completed when children are deemed to be at risk and
regularly reviewed to reflect childrens changing circumstances. Oversight of
all children at risk is undertaken by a dedicated missing and child sexual
exploitation coordinator, who analyses all risk assessments and return home
interviews. Information is shared and discussed with police on a daily basis,
and safe care strategies and wider safety planning are informed by these
discussions. Childrens care plans are not always updated following risk
assessments, but there is clear evidence from the records that protective
actions have taken place.


Children looked after do not always receive a timely health assessment. A lack
of comprehensive data and a vigorous quality assurance framework mean that
senior managers are not able to monitor health provision effectively for the
children whom they care for. At the time of the inspection, only half of initial
health assessments were completed within 20 working days, meaning that
childrens health needs are not understood and carers do not have all relevant
health information. Strengths and difficulties questionnaires are not completed
for some children. They are not routinely used in planning for children. For
example, they are not shared with health partners to inform health
assessments. Senior managers recognise these gaps and have a health
improvement plan with health partners, but its impact is currently limited.
(Recommendation)


There is a wide range of provision available for the emotional health support
of children looked after. Specialist psychological support is used to support
individual children as required, although pathways to access services are
unclear. Despite this lack of clarity, the local authority ensures that no child


who is looked after waits for a response to their needs, and individual support
is provided as required. In addition, despite a lengthy waiting list for children
in York to access child and adolescent mental health services (CAMHS), no
child looked after is awaiting assessment or treatment.

The educational needs of children looked are well met. Most pupils attend
good or outstanding schools (89%). A small minority of children attend
schools outside the city. In such cases, the virtual school works closely with
other local authorities to ensure that appropriate education is identified and
that children receive services that meet their needs. Attainment at key stage 2
is not yet good enough, with just under a third of all children looked after
achieving the expected levels of attainment in reading, writing and
mathematics. Pupil premium is rightly focused on improving attainment in
these areas.


The majority of PEPs seen were good. They provide a clear insight into
childrens learning and development needs, and how these will be met. The
proportion of children looked after who have an up-to-date PEP is too low, at
local authority has set for itself.


Attendance of children at school in all age groups is good, and above the
national average. The virtual school headteacher carefully monitors the
attendance of all children and ensures that prompt action is taken by schools
to ensure that the reasons for any decline in attendance are fully explored.
Appropriate interventions are quickly put into place to ensure that children are
well supported in returning to the classroom. A small number of children
experienced a fixed-term exclusion in the past year, ranging from half a day
to eight days. A range of carefully considered interventions are quickly put
into place to support children in such circumstances, including the provision of
alternative education. There have been no permanent exclusions in the past
year.


At the time of the inspection, 12 children were receiving a timetable of fewer
than 25 hours a week, for a variety of reasons. Each childs individual
circumstances are tracked and closely monitored by the virtual headteacher,
and each has an individual action plan. Children benefit from a range of
activities, which are tailored to meet their individual needs, and to engage and
motivate them to learn and achieve. A number have made progress across
many areas, including improved attendance.


Assessments of children looked after are not regularly updated to reflect
significant changes in a childs circumstances. In a small number of cases,
placement plans for children had insufficient detail relating to needs and how
these would be met. Updated information is reflected in social workers
reports for looked after reviews, but there is no clear, specific assessment to
redefine childrens needs to help to inform care planning. This is particularly


relevant for some children whose circumstances have changed significantly
since their last review. (Recommendation)

Social workers visit children frequently, at least within minimum timescales,
and see them alone when appropriate. In the majority of cases, the purpose
of visits to children is clearly recorded, with childrens voice being evident.
Inspectors viewed positive examples of direct work with children, helping
them to understand their journeys to becoming and being looked after. Social
workers know children well, prepare them sensitively for placement changes
and help them to understand the reasons why they became looked after and
the plans for their futures.


Children looked after reviews are mostly held within statutory timescales and,
in the vast majority, the needs of children are well considered, with carefully
thought-through changes to childrens care plans. However, the local
authoritys own information identifies that IROs are not consistently seeing
children prior to their looked after reviews. There is evidence on the majority
of childrens records of IROs scrutinising childrens plans, yet the impact of
their challenge is not well evidenced. Neither are they robustly capturing data
relating to partner agency attendance at reviews to ensure that all relevant
information is available to facilitate planning for children. (Recommendation)


Children are carefully matched to carers, and their wishes and feelings are
considered well. Children are prepared with information about their carers
and, when possible, introductory visits are made. Brothers and sisters are
consistently placed together, unless their plans identify that this would not be
in their best interests. When this is not the case, arrangements for contact are
considered well to ensure that brothers and sisters retain appropriate and
meaningful contact with each other. Arrangements for children looked after to
engage in contact with members of their extended families and those people
important to them are given appropriate attention and priority at looked after
reviews.


The large majority of children looked after benefit from stable, positive
placements, and there have been only three disruptions of long-term foster
placements in the past 12 months. Stability meetings are held when difficulties
arise, and every effort is made to prevent placement breakdowns, with
appropriate support and creative intervention packages put in place.


The local authority is committed to ensuring that children and young people
are looked after within the city, when it is safe to do so. The vast majority of
children, in cases seen by inspectors in which a child is living at a distance
from York, are visited regularly by their social worker. However, scrutiny of
childrens records identified a lack of information being provided to carers
when children are first placed with them. Children who have a disability or
complex health needs receive coordinated, high-quality placements, which are
based on assessed needs.



Fostering services meet the needs of children well. Foster carers benefit from
regular supervision, training and support. A particular strength is the offer of a
specialist accredited trauma and attachment course, developed with a local
university. At the time of the inspection, 20 carers had either completed or are
undertaking this provision, designed to strengthen their understanding of
childrens emotional needs. Foster carers spoken to by inspectors value this
training, and report that it has increased their knowledge and resilience and
helped them better to understand the needs of the children whom they care
for. They confirmed that they receive a good service from the local authority
and are treated as professional members of the care team around children.
Carers report that clear information is shared with them to help them to make
decisions about whether they are in a position to meet childrens needs.
Foster carers exercise delegated authority on an individual basis, making dayto-day decisions for children in their care. This helps to normalise childrens
experiences.


The sufficiency duty is met, although the local authority continues to face
challenges to increase its in-house resource. There is an ambitious strategy,
entitled Make York home, designed to increase the range and numbers of
local foster placements while reducing the numbers of children in privatesector fostering and residential provision. There was a slight increase in the
number of children placed with York carers between March and October 2016.


The local authority is working well with neighbouring authorities towards a
regional approach to receiving unaccompanied asylum-seeking children safely
and effectively into the region. The regional approach is developing a model
for the delivery of sustainable, child-centred health, education and care.
Currently, the local authority cares for four unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children, who are very well supported. A programme to recruit foster carers
for this specific purpose is well underway, and so far has recruited two carers.


Children enjoy a wide range of leisure activities that support their wider
emotional and social development, both at home and in school. Carers and
residential staff support children and young people well to become involved in
social, recreational and friendship-building activities. Childrens successes and
achievements are celebrated on an individual level by both their carers and
senior managers.


It is a particular strength that the voices of children looked after are heard by
senior managers and influence strongly how some services and policies are
developed. Clear processes are in place for children to make a complaint.
Advocacy support is strong, enabling children to feel supported in resolving
issues of concern to them. Since April 2016, there have been 30 referrals
made to the advocacy service. Advocacy support is available to children to
ensure that their views are heard in looked after reviews, and a number of
children benefit from such provision, with advocates either attending with


them or on their behalf. York has an impressive commitment to the provision
of independent visitor support. At the time of the inspection, 28 children
benefited from this provision. Five of these children have had support for over
five years, contributing to childrens sense of stability.

The CiCCs Show me that I matter group is highly effective in representing
the views and interests of children looked after. The council is facilitated well
and has three separate groups to ensure that the views of children in different
age groups are well represented. The groups are attended by enthusiastic,
committed children and young people who are rightly proud of their
involvement and impact on ensuring that the voices of children are heard.

The graded judgement for adoption performance is that it is good

When adoption is the agreed plan for the child, there is a strong focus on
securing the right placement at the right time. The adoption service benefits
from the leadership of a competent manager and from a team of skilled and
experienced social workers, who are committed to finding adopters who can
best meet the needs of the children in the local authoritys care, regardless of
complexity.


The co-location of the adoption service with the fostering team and locality
social workers ensures that children whose plan may result in adoption are
known at the earliest opportunity, to facilitate timely family finding and
matching. For a very small minority of children (two), the local authority
recognises an over-optimistic view of the ability of some families to change to
meet the needs of their child. This has resulted in delay in the children
securing legal permanence outside their birth family and being matched at the
earliest opportunity to an adoptive family.


The adoption team has a good understanding of national and regional policy
developments, and the potential impact on local services. The development of
regionalisation is advancing well, with the local authority taking a lead role in
planning for shared resources, greater consistency of regional policy and
practice, and access to a wider pool of adopters.


Adoption performance against the government scorecard is improving. Over
the past 18 months, the time between a child becoming looked after and
moving in with their adoptive family has been reduced. Five children were
placed for adoption in 2016, with an average completion rate of 380 days.
This is 56 days fewer than the performance targets set by the government.
Performance has also improved in the past 12 months in relation to the
number of days between the local authority receiving court authority to place
a child for adoption and the local authority matching a child with their
adoptive family. In the past year, 11 children have been matched to their
adopters and, so far, eight of these children will be placed within the


governments expected targets. It is clear from those children who have
become looked after more recently (in the past year) that timeliness for
achieving permanence through adoption has improved.

Adoption performance over a three-year average in 201215 was adversely
affected by the search for adopters for two children who had highly complex
needs. The timescales were proportionate and necessary for the individual
children, and demonstrated that social workers do not give up trying to secure
permanence through adoption, whatever the challenges. Performance is
closely tracked and monitored. The reasons for delays are scrutinised, and
learning from this oversight is used to develop training for social workers to
improve timeliness for children further.


Strong efforts are being made to enhance the skill base of childrens social
workers and those within the adoption team to assess childrens needs
consistently and robustly. Childrens recorded information and child
permanence assessments detail clear chronologies of all family-finding
activity, as well as comprehensive analysis and evaluation of childrens
histories and identified needs. They are well written and tell childrens stories
sensitively. Older childrens views are very well captured during this process.
Assessments of brothers and sisters in child permanence reports are of good
quality, and in the past three years there have been no reversals of plans for
family groups when the plan has been for them to stay together.


Most prospective adopter assessments are of consistently good quality and
completed within six months. They are thorough, suitably probing and are
sensitive to the strengths, vulnerabilities and cultural heritage of each
applicant, which assists suitable matching of children to them. Adopters report
that their experiences of the assessment process and the training prepared
them well to adopt. They valued the consistency of the adoption team,
especially the honesty relating to the complex histories of many of the
children who require a permanent family.


Detailed life-story books help children to explore and understand their
experiences and identities. Life-story work is completed by qualified and
experienced family support workers who know the children and birth family.
This provides an informative picture of the childs history and family, with
clear and sensitive explanations of the reasons why they are not living with
their birth parents. Social workers who know the children well prepare
sufficiently detailed later-life letters that in the future will help the child to
understand their history. The letters include clear and factual information
about their birth family and their life before adoption.


Family finding is good, and it focuses well on making sure that children are
found the best family to meet their needs as soon as possible. The use of
national and regional search systems, in collaboration with voluntary adoption
agencies and other authorities as part of a regional consortium, is


comprehensive. As a result, matching of children and young people to
potential adopters is progressed without unnecessary delay, in most cases.

There has been just one revocation of an adoption order and only one child
who has had a disrupted adoption in the past five years. The local authority
recognises that any revocations or disruptions have a negative impact on
children and their families, which further delays the childs ability to attach to
their permanent family.


The current recruitment strategy targets adopters who can prioritise the needs
of older children, children who have additional needs and groups of brothers
and sisters. Recruitment policy, materials and practice reflect the positive
views of the adopters who met with inspectors, that the local authority is
inclusive in its approach to applicants from diverse groups, for example
minority ethnic groups and same-sex couples. Monthly adoption recruitment
meetings are received well by potential adopters due to the clarity of
information and the inclusion of experienced adopters to explain the process
of adoption and to share their experiences.


Effective use of a consortium approach to early identification of fostering to
adopt carers ensures that this permanency option is embedded well in the
authority, and 11 children have been placed for adoption through concurrent
planning in the past five years. The adoption team is focused on increasing
the numbers of fostering to adopt carers, as the benefits for the child in
attaching to a permanent carer are recognised.


The adoption panel has a suitably experienced, qualified and sufficiently
independent chair, with a wide range of appropriate lay members and health
and legal representatives. There is a strong user perspective from adopters,
which provides the panel with suitably diverse viewpoints and experiences.
The panel meets approximately every three weeks to minimise delay for
children. Meeting minutes demonstrate well-considered, informed decisions
and challenges, which help to protect childrens best interests.
Recommendations following adoption medicals are reviewed to sufficient
depth, and further clarity is sought, if required, to ensure that proposed
matches of children to adopters are secure. As well as detailing the work
undertaken by the panel, the chairs six-monthly adoption report gives helpful
feedback regarding the quality of assessments and social work practice.
Quality assurance provided by the agency adviser ensures that the papers
presented to panel are of a high quality, in order to minimise delays in
decision-making. The agency decision-maker carefully considers panel
decisions in a timely way, and the rationale for his decision is clearly recorded.


Post-adoption support is provided to all families that have experienced
adoption, which includes families that have adopted elsewhere and come to
live in the city. During 201516, 48 families were being supported, with a total
of 67 children being assisted with additional resources. Several examples of


sensitive support to birth families were also seen by inspectors. Decisionmaking regarding ongoing contact with children post-adoption and the
support options available are discussed with adopters and birth parents.

The progress of detailed and analytical adoption support applications is closely
monitored by the adoption team manager, who has built up a body of
knowledge regarding preferred providers for bespoke counselling, specific
therapy and training.


Support after adoption was seen by all the adopters whom inspectors met as
highly positive, and several examples of effective support were cited. Adopters
all said that they would recommend York as an adoption agency, because of
the realism, support and ability of the workers to manage expectations and
anxieties.

The graded judgement about the experience and progress of care leavers
is that it is good

As a corporate parent, the local authority has high aspirations for its care
leavers. Effective systems are in place for care leavers to access support when
they need it. Pathway support workers are skilled in building strong
relationships with care leavers, and work hard to engage and support them.
They know the young people well and have a good understanding of their
individual needs and circumstances.


Social workers and pathway workers have manageable caseloads and, as a
result, keep in touch with all of their of care leavers. Young people spoken to
by inspectors reported feeling safe in their accommodation and knowing
where to seek support if they require it. They also receive effective advice and
guidance about health issues, including substance misuse, sexual health and
pregnancy support. As a result, they are aware of how to access extended
health services.


The pathway team is well aware of the risks facing young people, such as
offending, alcohol and substance misuse. The team has received a range of
training, such as on the issue of child sexual exploitation, including how to use
the risk assessment tool and guidance on information-sharing pathways.
Pathway workers use their knowledge well in being vigilant to helping to keep
young people safe by developing and extending their understanding of
personal safety. Care leavers individual pathway plans reflect strategies to
minimise such risks.


Pathway support workers liaise closely with childrens social workers to ensure
a smooth transition for young people moving to the leaving care service. This
enables them to build up an early and positive relationship with the young
person. For care leavers who have a disability and those who require adult


social care, transition planning begins soon after their 16th birthdays, thereby
reducing uncertainty and anxiety for young people and ensuring that they
continue to be supported effectively.

The physical health needs of care leavers are appropriately addressed within
their individual pathway plans. Examples were seen by inspectors of young
people independently accessing local medical services, such as general
practitioners, opticians and dental services, and many had gym membership.
However, pathway plans do not focus on how care leavers well-being and
mental health needs are to be addressed. Care leavers do not have records of
their health information. Although there are plans to provide care leavers with
access to their health histories early in 2017, few young people are aware of
this plan. In addition, care leavers spoken to by inspectors were unclear about
how to access support for their emotional and mental health needs, and
described loneliness and isolation as having the biggest impact on their
emotional well-being.


Care leavers receive good support from carers and key workers to help to
build up their skills to live independently, such as saving money, budgeting
and cooking for themselves. A pathway life-skills toolkit has been developed
to support carers and key workers in assessing the levels of help that care
leavers need in their journeys towards independence. Care leavers in
supported housing benefit from more personalised and incremental support
that builds their life skills, resilience and confidence at a pace that enables
them to cope with the challenges associated with a planned move towards
independent living. Young people are encouraged to remain looked after until
they are 18 years old, and they are supported to remain with their foster
carers after their 18th birthdays. Currently, there are 11 care leavers
supported by these arrangements.


Good partnership work between the virtual school, the pathways team and
the Connexions service has ensured that the proportion of care leavers in
education, employment or training is high, at 69%, compared to the England
average (49%). Effective arrangements are in place to support those young
people who are not in employment, employment or training (NEET).


The local authority has a clear focus on reducing the number of young people
NEET further, and has very recently established two new initiatives to support
those young people who are at risk of becoming NEET or who are difficult to
engage. Bright futures, a local initiative funded by the careers and enterprise
fund, jointly supported by a range of partners including the Connexions
service, the Leeds City Region Local Enterprise and the York, North Yorkshire
and East Riding Local Enterprise Partnership, seeks to provide young people
with targeted information regarding career options and choices. A second
initiative, the Springboard project, has very recently been established to
support care leavers who are NEET with the skills needed to benefit from


structured learning opportunities. While it is too early to judge the
effectiveness of either project, partnership working is strong.

Care leavers are encouraged to attend higher education, and 11% are
supported in college. This is above the England rate of 6%. The nine care
leavers subject to a custodial sentence are visited regularly to ensure that
they have ongoing access to educational courses and training while in prison.
Care leavers have preferential status and access, through a guaranteed
interview scheme, to available apprenticeship vacancies within the local
authority. However, few care leavers apply, and participation rates are low.


The Show me that I still matter group is particularly proud of its
achievements and the work completed through the Aspire to more project, a
national award-winning project undertaken in collaboration with Inspired
Youth that celebrates care leavers experiences. The local authority celebrates
young peoples success through annual awards. Care leavers use their voice
well through the Show me that I still matter group, to influence how the local
authority responds to their needs. Young people said that they are well
supported and feel that key workers listen carefully, record their views well
and act on these. As a result, most are positive about the care and support
that they receive.


The local authority has a range of suitable accommodation options for care
leavers. A detailed sufficiency and placement commissioning strategy ensures
that there is an understanding of the current and future placement needs of
care leavers. A staying put strategy has been adopted as the first choice for
young people leaving care, if this best meets their needs. This is facilitated by
the accommodation officer, who attends the review closest to the young
persons 16th birthdays to start planning for their leaving care.


Care leavers have the option to experience independence in a taster flat for
four weeks and then to return to the foster care placement to plan for the
move to a trainer flat, should they not wish to stay with their carer. Most care
leavers (87%) live in suitable accommodation. This figure is affected by the
nine young people who are in custody and one care leaver who is homeless,
despite the local authoritys attempts to provide accommodation.


The pathway team maintains regular contact with those serving a custodial
sentence so that appropriate plans can be made, ready for their release or
until they reach their 21st birthdays.


There are no young people living in houses of multiple occupancy. A majority
of care leavers live independently and successfully maintain their tenancies.
Nine young people are at university and are supported to return to their foster
care staying put arrangements during holiday periods. There are two
emergency accommodation options, Night stop and Crash pad, which
support care leavers at times of crisis. Every effort is made to support the


young person in their chosen accommodation. When there is a risk of the
accommodation becoming unsuitable or the young person becoming
homeless, a 'second-chance meeting is quickly held. At this meeting, creative
support packages are developed and discussed with the care leaver in order
to meet their individual housing needs. Risk assessments are used well to
inform decisions and actions.

Care leavers have a good understanding of their rights and responsibilities,
including how to raise an issue or make a complaint about the quality of
service that they receive. They have a good level of knowledge of what
support they can expect from their carers, key workers and others, including
advocacy. Care leavers stated that the local authority listens carefully, records
their views well and acts on any concerns that they raise. Care leavers, for
example, know that they can apply for a grant to assist them with the costs of
setting up and furnishing their first home, while for those aged 16 to 18 a
bursary is provided through their nominated college or training provider,
underlining the importance of education and skills. Care leavers who enter
higher education benefit from a bursary to support them, and their
accommodation costs are met by the local authority.


Leadership, management and
governance

Good

Summary
The DCS and the senior management team share a well-articulated vision of
continuous improvement and progress for all children in York. A whole-service
restructuring is taking place and is due to be completed by January 2017. This
journey of change is beginning to effect improvements in outcomes for most children
across the service. It is not yet complete, so the full impact of change cannot be
seen for all children.
The chief executive leads a corporate commitment, supporting a shared vision to
deliver better than good services to children and families. Strategic priorities for
children are shared and aligned across a comprehensive governance structure across
the multi-agency partnership. These priorities are translated well through effective
planning across all strategic boards, including the YorOK Childrens Trust Board, the
CYSCB and the HWB. Highly effective links with the CYSCB ensure that thresholds of
need for children are agreed and understood at both operational and strategic levels.
Senior managers have developed strong and sustained relationships with multiagency partners. The voice of children and young people is integral to strategic and
operational activity to ensure that intervention is purposeful and meaningful. The
promotion of childrens views is embedded within the foundations of the local
authority and partnership culture.
Leaders and managers know and understand the service well, including its strengths
and areas of weakness. There are strong and highly effective links between the
council and voluntary and community sector organisations. Relationships are based
on good, honest communication and consultation. The local authority is a strong and
effective corporate parent. A robust sufficiency and commissioning strategy is in
place to meet current and future placement needs.
Workforce planning is effective. Staff are supported through a wide range of training
opportunities, feel extremely well supported and are highly committed to their work.
This has resulted in high retention rates and a reduction in the use of agency
workers. Inspectors found that, while staff supervision is regular, there are
weaknesses in the quality of supervision records and the oversight of frontline
managers. Supervision is not driving forward positive change for some children.
Audit activity is not consistently strong and does not provide managers with a clear
understanding of the experience and progress of all children, and too many children
experience delay in their needs being assessed and identified.


Inspection findings

Effective leadership by the DCS, senior leaders and elected members is
demonstrated through strong and dynamic partnership working and a clear
focus on priorities. There is a whole-council approach and commitment to
keeping children safe and to helping them to thrive and develop. These
priorities are translated well through effective planning across all strategic
boards, including the YorOK Childrens Trust Board, the CYSCB and the HWB.
Together, they are driving forward a clear vision and transformation plan to
improve outcomes for children in York.


The strengths of this collaboration hold a common purpose, with the
commitment of all partner agencies to working imaginatively in a climate of
change and budget reductions. This includes a recent financial investment for
childrens services by the council of 1.9m and 0.5 million in a new case
management system. This includes the facility for all staff to access online
revised protocols between children and adult services to ensure a smooth
suitable transition for children requiring services into adulthood.


The chief executive ensures that strong governance arrangements with clear
lines of accountability are in place for the discharge of statutory duties. There
are highly effective links to the CYSCB, ensuring robust governance of the
wider role of the multi-agency partnership in the planning and scrutiny of
services. Additional support and challenge are provided from the learning,
culture and scrutiny committee and the chief officers reference and advisory
group. The DCS provides a consistent, effective presence on all strategic
boards to ensure the prioritisation of childrens needs. An example of his
positive impact is that, with support from the CYSCB chair, the DCS
successfully obtained agreement from partners to extend the child sexual
abuse awareness-raising campaign, Its not OK.


The CYSCB chair provides appropriate and regular reports to the YorOK Trust
Board and the DCS. This includes local safeguarding updates from focused
CYSCB sub-groups and national statutory changes to support proactive
planning for change. An inter-board protocol approved between the CYSCB,
the HWB, the YorOK Trust Board, the Adult Safeguarding Board and the Safer
York Partnership ensures clear lines of governance and accountability for
crosscutting issues. For example, there are robust high-level multi-agency
arrangements in place for the management of domestic abuse across
agencies. A joint coordinating group across York and North Yorkshire County
Council coordinates training, commissioning and information sharing,
increasing staff confidence effectively to identify and respond to childrens
needs.


This well-established governance structure has supported leaders and
managers in the initiation of an ambitious vision of continuous improvement


for children. The most significant developments and change have occurred in
the past 12 months, and this has included further service restructuring.
Consequently, the full impact of this restructuring for all children is yet to be
seen, although evidence thus far demonstrates that it has the right trajectory
for further improvement.

The new electronic client management system was introduced in March 2016
with the introduction of a new social care recording system. The migration of
data and childrens records are complete and are beginning to provide
improved case management capabilities with better functionality and ease of
use. While most staff and managers welcome this change, not all staff have
confidence in the system yet. Inspectors found gaps in recording in childrens
files and in staff supervision records, making it difficult to identify how some
children were progressing and how supervision is consistently supporting and
monitoring social work practice. In addition, some performance management
functions are not yet fully supporting senior management oversight of
practice. For example, audit activity is not consistently strong. The transitional
migration of information has led to reduced audit activity, with only six of 25
audits completed between June and August 2016.


The restructuring of social work teams in September 2016 and the planned
restructuring of early help into local area teams in January 2017 are beginning
to create the foundations for positive change. The local authority recognised a
need to further improve the delivery of early help interventions and the quality
and timeliness of childrens assessments to improve how families are
supported. Inspectors agree that there is a need to build workers skills,
knowledge and confidence to improve the analysis in childrens assessments
and the timeliness of their completion, and to ensure that they are
proportionate to childrens needs.


The organisation promotes an open culture of learning to inform continuous
improvement. The DCS invites internal and external scrutiny and challenge of
frontline practice, engaging in reciprocal regional peer reviews. For example,
in March 2016, the DCS invited the CYSCB chair to complete a peer challenge
of the progress of the referral and assessment service. The transparency and
requests for feedback to inform plans for change also extend to partners and
staff. For example, all staff can access online information on up-to-date
research and tools to support them with operational practice.


Multi-agency partnerships are a particular strength, and thresholds of need for
children are agreed and understood at both operational and strategic levels.
The early help strategy and threshold document is currently under review in
preparation for the restructuring of early help services in January 2017. There
is an expressed commitment to early help investment in new models of
delivery to embrace a whole family approach. The partnership ensures that
there is a robust response to identifying and protecting children at risk of and
subject to child sexual exploitation, including those who go missing from


home, care or education. Appropriate policies and procedures receive senior
management oversight, and the expertise of the child sexual exploitation
coordinator ensures that effective plans are in place to minimise risk to
children.

Senior leaders are highly visible and accessible. They are aware of individual
children for whom there is a high degree of risk or complexity. Inspectors
identified a strong and tangible commitment to putting children at the heart of
the strategy and delivery of services. This is demonstrated by children having
a direct link to decision-makers and thereby influencing strategic plans.
Managers continue to challenge themselves and partners to look at innovative
and different ways to engage with all children of all ages and with different
levels of need. Firmly embedded across the organisation is a dedication to
listening to children and understanding their experiences to develop services
that make a difference to their lives. A well-established voice and involvement
strategy promotes a network of diverse youth groups, including the CiCCs
Show me that I matter group, the care leavers Show me that I still matter
youth council and young inspectors.


Childrens services commissioning of activity at a strategic and delegated local
level is effective, and receives scrutiny and oversight from the YorOK Trust
Board and integrated commissioning board. Commissioning decisions follow a
transparent review process, with close partnership working with the childrens
rights and advocacy service.


The local authority is a strong and progressive corporate parent. A successful
local sufficiency strategy supports operational practice, informing managers
and workers of childrens needs, areas of current demand and projections for
the future. This proactive response fully aligns with the ethos of the Make
York home strategy that is successfully increasing the numbers of children
looked after who are remaining and returning to live in the city to improve
their outcomes. Managers know the service area risks and capacity, and are
actively planning for identified changes in the demographics of the foster care
population. This includes recognition and promotion of increased numbers of
children who remain living with their carers beyond the age of 18 years in
staying put arrangements and the ageing foster carer population.


An ambitious children and young people in care strategy 20162020 is driving
forward six key strategic themes, including that good is not good enough.
This demonstrates the concerted efforts by senior leaders and managers to
obtain full political ownership of corporate parent responsibilities. The recent
appointment of a new chair is already having a positive impact on the focus of
the corporate parenting boards responsibilities, including an open door
invitation to the CiCCs Show me that I matter group and recognition that
care leavers needs should be a higher priority.



Evidence of early impact can be seen in the development of knowledge and
skills in those professionals who have contact with children, to support the
early identification and intervention of those children who have emerging
emotional and mental health needs. This has led to innovative solutions,
including emotional literacy support assistants and mental health well-being
workers in schools.


A positive learning culture is demonstrated through a variety of methods.
Senior managers, including heads of service, are included in a corporate
training needs analysis process. There is a comprehensive learning and
development offer for all practitioners and managers, including a specialist
programme for childrens social care staff. The local authority is part of the
University of York Making research count consortium to undertake research,
using the findings to develop and improve social work practice. An assessed
and supported year in employment programme is in place for all newly
qualified social workers. Experienced social workers are also actively
encouraged to undertake the practice educator award delivered by the
University of York.


Exploring lessons learned from serious case reviews is driven by the CYSCB
and promoted through the YorOK Trust Board. Communication from the
YorOK Trust Board is strong, with regular information and newsletters
disseminated to frontline staff. Detailed and recent information on activities of
the trust ensure that staff are aware of new initiatives and resources. This
includes the launch of a neglect graded care profile in July 2016, and
storyboards that include useful resources to support staff in working with
children at risk of and subject to child sexual exploitation and those living in
situations where there is domestic abuse. This provides workers with a
consistent and shared knowledge of developments and promotes ownership of
ambition for children within the organisation.


Staff have good access to a wide range of single-and multi-agency training. A
comprehensive training, learning and development strategy extends to foster
carers and providers. This includes a successful offer of a specialist-accredited
trauma and attachment course developed with a local university. Carers report
to inspectors that this training helps them to support the children whom they
look after and improves their confidence.


Senior managers receive regular performance information on frontline
operational practice through a revised comprehensive quality assurance
framework. Snapshot scorecard data provide managers and senior leaders
with a review of activity. The scorecards demonstrate when statutory
timescales are met and when they are not. At the time of the inspection, 49%
of children had not received a timely assessment of their needs. Senior
managers had been aware of this deterioration over a six-month period and
articulated that this was in part due to capacity issues prior to the
restructuring and the poor performance of some frontline staff and managers.


The restructuring has begun to address some of these issues, and social
workers now have small and manageable caseloads. This is evidencing more
direct work with children, but is not yet impacting positively on the timeliness
or quality of childrens assessments. (Recommendation)

Staff supervision is regular, although the performance scorecards do not
provide detailed analysis or information on the quality of supervision.
Inspectors saw variability in the quality of supervision records at all levels of
the organisation. Records do not evidence how staff are challenged and
supported to reflect on their practice or, importantly, how their interventions
are impacting on childrens lives. This is a particular weakness in the
supervision records of frontline social workers by their managers.
(Recommendation)


Senior managers are progressing well an articulated vision of workforce
requirements, which are seen as integral to the planning and restructuring of
childrens services. Leaders know their workforce requirements and have had
success in recruiting and retaining staff. This is reflected in the turnover of
staff, which is low, at 1%, making the local authority a regional and national
outlier. Staff spoken to by inspectors said that they felt valued, safe and
supported. There are no agency staff in management posts at the time of
inspection, and managers invest in staff progression, recognising that a skilled
and confident workforce is crucial to supporting change and promoting good
social work practice. A dedicated permanent principal social worker is a
member of two of the CYSCB sub-groups, which ensures active oversight of
operational practice links with developing future innovation projects, for
example supporting managers and staff with the development of the rollout of
the neglect graded care profile.


Senior managers endeavour to establish the right workforce with sufficient
skills and knowledge to drive forward innovation and change. There is a
willingness and commitment from staff at all levels and across the wider multiagency partnership to achieve the vision to progress and improve outcomes
for children. This is evidenced both in the imminent transition of early help
arrangements to three multi-disciplinary teams across the city and the recent
implementation of a multi-agency integrated assessment framework. The vast
majority of key partners agencies have signed up to this model of
assessment. Already, improved information sharing within single assessments
is in evidence, although this is not yet leading to an improved analysis of
childrens holistic needs. (Recommendation)


Despite an unsuccessful innovation bid to support new models of working to
assess parent capacity to change, managers have not been prevented from
tenaciously progressing this. Senior managers have a contingency plan for
alternative project implementation with buy-in from agency partners to access
alternative resources. There is a shared belief that this improvement will lead


to better assessment and analysis of risk and, ultimately, better than good
plans to improve childrens outcomes sooner.

Yorks willingness to explore, implement and adapt innovation models that
meet local requirements includes implementation of the family drug and
alcohol court pilot. This model is community based and developed around a
pre-existing adult public health commissioned substance misuse service.
Although the numbers of children who have a child protection plan in which
substance misuse is identified as a significant factor are low, this continues to
be a priority for partners in order to improve the life chances and experiences
of these children.


There are strong, reciprocal working relationships between Cafcass and the
local authority. The local authority actively participates and has representation
on the family justice board. The local judiciary reports good compliance with
timescales for children progressing through the PLO and that good-quality
social work evidence is presented to the court, thus reducing the need for
additional evidence or independent experts to be called.


The Local Safeguarding Children Board (LSCB)
The Local Safeguarding Children Board is outstanding
Executive summary
The City of York Local Safeguarding Children Board (CYSCB) is outstanding. The
independent chair is resolute in his leadership of the board. This has resulted in
strong and highly effective multi-agency partnership working across the city. These
partnerships are fundamental to the work of the CYSCB in sustaining the
commitment to safeguarding children and in ensuring a focus on the strategic
priorities. Governance arrangements are strong and highly effective. Challenge by
the chief executive of the strategic leads and oversight of the work of the
independent chair, through the chief officers reference and advisory group, ensures
that the CYSCB is focused on its priorities and maintains an ambitious work
programme.
Key to the success of the board is the explicit focus on understanding the
perspectives of children and young people by asking for and listening to their views
and, most importantly, acting on them. This ensures that the voice of the child is
actively considered across all aspects of the boards work and leads to improvements
in the quality of practice.
The priorities of the board, aligned and underpinned by the work of the sub-groups,
strengthen the effectiveness of partnership working. The priorities are rightly linked
to the strategic priorities of the key partnerships and have a very clear focus on
improving frontline practice and developing clear policies and procedures.
Consequently, the board is highly instrumental in influencing and shaping services for
children in York.
The priorities are further underpinned by an extensive and comprehensive learning
and development programme. This is based on a detailed needs analysis, lessons
learned and the outcomes of the well-embedded performance and quality assurance
processes. A specific accomplishment of the board, in collaboration with a national
charity and another local authority, facilitated by the chair, has been the Its not OK
campaign, to raise awareness about child sexual abuse and exploitation.
Performance monitoring and quality assurance arrangements are rigorous, with
section 11 audits augmented by themed and multi-agency auditing programmes. In
addition, the quality of performance data from the partnerships is comprehensive
and is used well to reflect on outcomes and drive the work of the board, while
contributing further to scrutiny and oversight.
The CYSCB annual report is an accurate and transparent overview and assessment of
performance and it contains plans to progress further improvement.


Inspection findings  the Local Safeguarding Children Board

The CYSCB) coordinates well the key partnerships to ensure the effectiveness
of their safeguarding arrangements, and to focus on the critical priorities to
improve and develop services to children further. The independent chair is
highly effective and has been fundamental in developing the focus of the
board and maintaining mature and challenging partnerships. The partnerships
all contribute financially to the work of the board. Prudent financial
management and planning have enabled the CYSCB to prioritise funding for
key initiatives. When necessary, additional funding to support important areas
of work, such as the implementation of multi-agency child sexual exploitation
strategies and training, has been commissioned and secured from the local
authority, police and the clinical commissioning group.


Membership of the board is robust, with partners who have sufficient seniority
to hold their agencies to account. Attendance is good, membership is stable
and there is a very strong commitment from members, including positive
involvement of the lay member with close, highly effective working
relationships, which ensure that progress is sustained. Representation of key
partnerships across the board is highly influential in ensuring that key
safeguarding issues and practice are disseminated. In particular, the
representation from the police is commendable, with the chief constable as
statutory board member, an assistant chief constable as chair of the
partnership, practice scrutiny and review group (PPSRG) and other police
representatives as active key members of sub-groups. Representation from
education partners is extensive, including academies and independent schools.
The representation by health partners is wide ranging and very strong.


The governance and effectiveness of the board are strengthened through the
CYSCB independent chairs membership of the chief officers reference and
advisory group (CORAG), which meets regularly and includes the senior
officers of the council, police and health partners. CORAG does not replace the
statutory functions of the CYSCB, but ensures that there is a clear focus on
keeping children safe, by ensuring that chief officers are aware of any issues
and that they can use their authority to progress safeguarding issues swiftly
across the partnerships.


The CYSCB chair also chairs the inter-board chairs group, which has a clear
protocol between the City of York HWB and its sub-board, YorOK Childrens
Trust Board, the CYSCB, the Safeguarding Adults Board and the Safer York
partnership. As a consequence, the priorities of the board are clearly linked to
the strategic objectives of the key partnerships to safeguard children.


Representation on the key strategic groups, highly effective governance,
consistent and comprehensive reporting to the learning and culture policy and
scrutiny committee of the local authority and regular engagement of the lead


member for children facilitate a strong culture of reciprocal challenge to and
from the CYSCB partners.

The CYSCB is instrumental in shaping service development through its
thematic priorities, linking to the work of the sub-groups. The thematic areas
for priority are clearly set out in the comprehensive business plan. The
priorities are early help, domestic abuse, neglect, child sexual abuse,
exploitation and going missing.


The board demonstrates rigour and forward thinking through the inclusion of
female genital mutilation as an additional priority. This is in recognition by the
board that the known local incidence of female genital mutilation is very low
and, consequently, it is especially important for the workforce to be very
skilled in its identification and to respond to the practice. To augment and
strengthen the role of the sub-groups in shaping services, the groups are
instrumental in developing policies and procedures to support and improve
frontline practice. Impact can be seen through the recent implementation of
the graded care profile, which is raising social workers awareness of the
impact of neglect. Evidence can be seen in childrens records and is articulated
by social workers in practice discussion. Policies are shared through the
priority, delivery and scrutiny group (PDSG) and signed off by the full boards
members.


The CYSCB has a strong focus on the quality of frontline practice to safeguard
children. The business plan clearly highlights how the board focuses on
frontline practice, recognising the critical importance of an effective referral
and assessment process. The service is appraised annually by the
independent chair of the CYSCB on the invitation of the DCS. The chair is keen
to involve CYSCB members in this type of activity, to develop their
understanding of frontline practice and to add rigour to this appraisal process.
As a result, a recent visit has been undertaken by a CYSCB health
representative to the referral and assessment team, to appraise the
effectiveness of the health partnerships at the front door and to seek to
identify any areas where practice needs to be improved.


The CYSCB chair is outward looking and has identified areas for further
strengthening of the work of the board through increased focus on work with
adult services. This is to ensure that adult services are aware of the impact on
children of living with parents or carers who have mental illness, or have
substance-misuse or alcohol-related difficulties. The CYSCB also recently had
an external peer review, the findings of which will be actioned and contribute
to further strengthening of the boards activities.


Statutory board members have a comprehensive understanding of the
priorities and expectations of them to ensure the effectiveness of
safeguarding arrangements in their individual organisations. This commitment
is demonstrated well through the strength of auditing and review processes.



The PPSRG is very effective in using auditing processes, including multiagency auditing, to consider assurances of safeguarding, to evaluate the
progress of the board priorities and to appraise frontline practice. These
processes have identified areas of good practice and areas of development,
and have influenced improvements. These have included the quality of minute
taking, consistent attendance by professionals at childrens reviews and the
recording of the voluntary accommodation of children according to section 20
of the Children Act 1989. Section 11 audits are undertaken routinely and are
subject to scrutiny, challenge and moderation. There have been no particular
themes arising from section 11 audits.


Multi-agency performance information provided to the board as performance
scorecards is very comprehensive and is highly scrutinised. It is used
effectively to consider trends, to direct the work of the sub-groups and
partner agencies, and to inform the training needs analysis. Data is provided
by a wide range of partners, including the police, the independent domestic
abuse services, childrens services, education and health. The sub-groups of
the board consider the data and provide commentary, which is then
considered by the priority, delivery and scrutiny group (PDSG).


The PDSG is the central and vital operational arm of the CYSCB. The PDSG is
highly effective in streamlining the work of the board sub-groups, providing
challenge, monitoring progress and, importantly, ensuring that the work of the
groups is shared across the partnerships effectively. The group uses data and
analyses to highlight any areas of risk, learning and effectiveness, which are
then taken forward to the full board meeting. As part of the commitment to
improvement, the board has recently included a discrete focus on children
who have a disability, through the use of specific scorecard information, to
ensure that their specific needs are considered in all safeguarding matters.
However, this approach is not yet fully embedded.


The CYSCB has a strong culture of learning. Analysis of learning needs is used
well to inform the learning and improvement offer from the board. The
learning needs analysis ensures effective planning and the use of available
training and development resources. The learning needs analysis is based on
priorities, serious case reviews and lessons learned reviews, key findings
from single- and multi-agency audits, outcomes from regulatory inspection
activity and the evaluation of current training.


Training is evaluated both at the time of delivery and to establish what
learning has been taken forward to improve practice. To ensure further that
professionals are kept up to date, the CYSCB produces information in the form
of a newsletter, which provides information on any new initiatives, relevant
legislation and practice updates as well as easy-to-read one minute guides
jointly with North Yorkshire LSCB and child death overview panel (CDOP).



While York has not had a serious case review recently, the structure and
governance arrangements of the CYSCB are highly effective in drawing out
the key messages identified through lessons learned, single-agency and
thematic reviews, and case file auditing. Arrangements for case reviews have
been significantly strengthened. Following changes to the board structure in
February 2016, the case review sub-group has increased its rigour with
revised terms of reference. Most importantly, representation has improved,
with the involvement of education, the mental health trust, police and the
National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC). Key
messages and learning have also been taken forward from a childs case of
neglect, with an action plan in place and auditing processes to consider the
effectiveness of the learning. The findings were shared effectively with the
neglect sub-group to inform its work planning and the development of robust
procedures.


Childrens voice is prominent in every aspect of the CYSCBs work, and
scrutiny of the local authority and partnerships. There is a dynamic voice and
involvement group through which childrens views are promoted to help to
drive improvements in the engagement of children and understanding of their
experiences. For example, this includes views in child protection plans and
improved recording of childrens views by the police in return home
interviews, to provide a real focus on what is going on for children.


The annual report is a comprehensive, accurate and transparent overview and
assessment of performance, with an understanding of the effectiveness of
services. The report clearly highlights the key areas of practice across all
agencies and the actions being taken by the board to address shortfalls.


Board members clearly understand their responsibilities with regard to
ensuring that thresholds for child protection are well understood and applied.
Clear guidance on thresholds is available across the partnerships and on the
easily accessible and informative CYSCB website. The board, through the early
help sub-group, is working proactively to review the current threshold
guidance and procedures to ensure that they reflect changing structures in
the authority and are more user friendly.


The CYSCB has an established and highly proactive sub-group for child sexual
abuse and exploitation, the remit and scope of which include children who go
missing. Clear, open and coordinated partnerships are well established. This
enables the appropriate sharing of intelligence between partners to inform the
understanding of risk and intervention. The sub-group receives high-quality
comprehensive data, which is used to inform the strategic response of the
board. There are clear, well-defined practice guidance and a locally agreed
child sexual exploitation risk assessment tool to support referral, assessment
and planning in relation to child sexual abuse and exploitation. Performance
data and analysis from return home interviews with children who have been
missing are used comprehensively to consider and coordinate work. The


group has also been proactive in promoting a multi-agency information
sharing form, which is available to professionals to report intelligence about
any activity that they have seen that potentially relates to child sexual abuse
and/or exploitation.

The child sexual abuse, sexual exploitation and missing sub-group brings
together partners and has been extremely influential in raising the awareness
and responses to child sexual abuse and exploitation across York. The Its not
OK campaign has been highly effective in bringing together organisations
across the city to raise awareness and to provide support and training to
practitioners, parents and young people. This initiative was funded by the
board and shaped by the partnerships. Outcomes have been very positive, for
example, in raising both an awareness of risk indicators and the confidence of
workers to respond to those risks. Most importantly, it has encouraged young
people to speak out about any worries or concerns.


Arrangements to review and report on child deaths are comprehensive. The
CDOP covers both North Yorkshire County Council and the City of York, and
includes representatives from health, education, childrens services and the
police. From January 2017, the panel will include a lay representative from the
CYSCB to improve perspective and challenge. Recent reviews of child deaths
in York have not highlighted specific themes. There have been some delays
for reviews while awaiting some post-mortem outcomes. This has been a
particular issue in one area, but the appointment of an additional pathologist
should help to remedy the situation. A strength of the panel is its consistent
membership and its influence on reviewing processes and improving practice.
For example, it provides hospital practitioners with a resource box that
includes the equipment that they need to respond quickly to child deaths and
to gather essential information, and practitioners visit parents following
reviews to provide feedback and, when appropriate, support.


Information about this inspection
Inspectors have looked closely at the experiences of children and young people who
have needed or still need help and/or protection. This also includes children and
young people who are looked after and young people who are leaving care and
starting their lives as young adults.
Inspectors considered the quality of work and the difference that adults make to the
lives of children, young people and families. They read case files, watched how
professional staff work with families and each other and discussed the effectiveness
of help and care given to children and young people. Wherever possible, they talked
to children, young people and their families. In addition, the inspectors have tried to
understand what the local authority knows about how well it is performing, how well
it is doing and what difference it is making for the people whom it is trying to help,
protect and look after.
The inspection of the local authority was carried out under section 136 of the
Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board was carried out under section
Ofsted produces this report of the inspection of local authority functions and the
review of the Local Safeguarding Children Board under its power to combine reports
in accordance with section 152 of the Education and Inspections Act 2006.
The inspection team consisted of eight of Her Majestys Inspectors (HMI) and one
Social Care Regulatory Inspector from Ofsted.
The inspection team
Lead inspector: Tracey Metcalfe
Deputy lead inspector: Julie Knight
Team inspectors: Rachel Holden, Andy Whippey, Jan Edwards, Stella Elliot, Victor
Reid and Fiona Millns
Shadow inspectors: Nick Veysey
Senior data analyst: Clare Atkinson
Quality assurance manager: Bob Morton


Any complaints about the inspection or the report should be made following the procedures set out in
the guidance, Raising concerns and making complaints about Ofsted, which is available from Ofsteds
website: www.gov.uk/government/publications/complaints-about-ofsted. If you would like Ofsted to
send you a copy of the guidance, please telephone 0300 123 4234, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.

The Office for Standards in Education, Childrens Services and Skills (Ofsted) regulates and inspects to
achieve excellence in the care of children and young people, and in education and skills for learners of
all ages. It regulates and inspects childcare and childrens social care, and inspects the Children and
Family Court Advisory and Support Service (Cafcass), schools, colleges, initial teacher training, further
education and skills, adult and community learning, and education and training in prisons and other
secure establishments. It assesses council childrens services, and inspects services for children looked
after, safeguarding and child protection.
If you would like a copy of this document in a different format, such as large print or Braille, please
telephone 0300 123 1231, or email enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk.
You may reuse this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under
the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence, write to the Information Policy Team,
The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted.
Interested in our work? You can subscribe to our monthly newsletter for more information and
updates: http://eepurl.com/iTrDn.
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester
M1 2WD
T: 0300 123 4234
Textphone: 0161 618 8524
E: enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
W: www.ofsted.gov.uk
 Crown copyright 2017


